^title Architecture, Performance, and Games
^section Introduction

Before we plunge headfirst into a pile of patterns, I thought it might help to
give you some context about how I think about software architecture and how it
applies to games. It may help you understand the rest of this book better. If
nothing else, when you get dragged into an <span name="ammo">argument</span>
about how terrible (or awesome) design patterns and software architecture are,
it will give you some ammo to use.

<aside name="ammo">

Note that I didn't presume which side you're taking in that fight. Like any arms
dealer, I have wares for sale to all combatants.

</aside>

## What is Software Architecture?

<span name="won't">If</span> you read this book cover to cover, you won't come
away knowing the linear algebra behind 3D graphics or the calculus behind game
physics. It won't show you how to alpha-beta prune your AI's search tree or
simulate a room's reverberation in your audio playback.

<aside name="won't">

Wow, this paragraph would make a terrible ad for the book.

</aside>

Instead, this book is about the code *between* all of that. It's less about
writing code
than it is about *organizing* it. Every program has *some* organization, even if
it's just "jam the whole thing into `main()` and see what happens", so I think
it's more interesting to talk about what makes for *good* organization. How do
we tell a good architecture from a bad one?

I've been mulling over this question for about five years. Of course, like you,
I have an intuition about good design. We've all suffered through codebases so
<span name="suffered">bad</span>, the best you could hope to do for them is take
them out back and put them out of their misery.

<aside name="suffered">

Let's admit it, most of us are *responsible* for a few of those.

</aside>

A lucky few have had the opposite experience, a chance to work with beautifully
designed code. The kind of codebase that feels like a perfectly appointed luxury
hotel festooned with concierges waiting eagerly on your every whim. What's the
difference between the two?

### What is *good* software architecture?

For me, good design means that when I make a change, it's as if the entire
program was crafted in anticipation of it. I can solve a task with just a few
choice function calls that slot in perfectly, leaving not the slightest ripple
on the placid surface of the code.

That sounds pretty, but it's not exactly actionable. "Just write your code so
that changes don't disturb its placid surface." Right.

Let me break that down a bit. The first key piece is that *architecture is about
change*. Someone has to be modifying the codebase. If no one is touching the
code -- whether because it's perfect and complete or so wretched no one will
sully their text editor with it -- its design is irrelevant. The measure of a
design is how easily it accommodates changes. With no changes, it's a runner who
never leaves the starting line.

### How do you make a change?

Before you can change the code to add a new feature, to fix a bug, or for whatever
reason caused you to fire up your editor, you have to understand what the
existing code is doing. You don't have to know the whole program, of course, but
you need to <span name="ocr">load</span> all of the relevant pieces of it into
your primate brain.

<aside name="ocr">

It's weird to think that this is literally an OCR process.

</aside>

We tend to gloss over this step, but it's often the most time-consuming part of
programming. If you think paging some data from disk into RAM is slow, try
paging it into a simian cerebrum over a pair of optical nerves.

Once you've got all the right context into your wetware, you think for a bit and
figure out your solution. There can be a lot of back and forth here, but often
this is relatively straightforward. Once you understand the problem and the
parts of the code it touches, the actual coding is sometimes trivial.

You beat your meaty fingers on the keyboard for a while until the right colored
lights blink on screen and you're done, right? Not just yet! Before you write
<span name="tests">tests</span> and send it off for code review, you often have
some cleanup to do.

<aside name="tests">

Did I say "tests"? Oh, yes, I did. It's hard to write unit tests for some game
code, but a large fraction of the codebase is perfectly testable.

I won't get on a soapbox here, but I'll ask you to consider doing more automated
testing if you aren't already. Don't you have better things to do than manually
validate stuff over and over again?

</aside>

You jammed a bit more code into your game, but you don't want the next person to
come along to trip over the wrinkles you left throughout the source. Unless the
change is minor, there's usually a bit of reorganization to do to make your new
code integrate seamlessly with the rest of the program. If you do it right, the
next person to come along won't be able to tell when any line of code was
written.

In short, the flow chart for programming is something like:

<span name="life-cycle"></span>

<img src="images/architecture-cycle.png" alt="Get problem &rarr; Learn code &rarr; Code solution &rarr; Clean up &rarr; and back around to the beginning." />

<aside name="life-cycle">

The fact that there is no escape from that loop is a little alarming now that I
think about it.

</aside>

### How can decoupling help?

While it isn't obvious, I think much of software architecture is about that
learning phase. Loading code into neurons is so painfully slow that it pays to
find strategies to reduce the volume of it. This book has an entire section on
[*decoupling* patterns](decoupling-patterns.html), and a large chunk of *Design
Patterns* is about the same idea.

You can define "decoupling" a bunch of ways, but I think if two pieces of code
are coupled, it means you can't understand one without understanding the other.
If you *de*-couple them, you can reason about either side independently. That's
great because if only one of those pieces is relevant to your problem, you just
need to load *it* into your monkey brain and not the other half too.

To me, this is a key goal of software architecture: **minimize the amount of
knowledge you need to have in-cranium before you can make progress.**

The later stages come into play too, of course. Another definition of decoupling
is that a *change* to one piece of code doesn't necessitate a change to another.
We obviously need to change *something*, but the less coupling we have, the less
that change ripples throughout the rest of the game.

## At What Cost?

This sounds great, right? Decouple everything and you'll be able to code like
the wind. Each change will mean touching only one or two select methods, and you
can dance across the surface of the codebase leaving nary a shadow.

This feeling is exactly why people get excited about abstraction, modularity,
design patterns, and software architecture. A well-architected program really is
a joyful experience to work in, and everyone loves being more productive. Good
architecture makes a *huge* difference in productivity. It's hard to overstate
how profound an effect it can have.

But, like all things in life, it doesn't come free. Good architecture takes real
effort and discipline. Every time you make a change or implement a feature, you
have to work hard to integrate it gracefully into the rest of the program. You
have to take great care to both <span name="maintain">organize</span> the code
well and *keep* it organized throughout the thousands of little changes that
make up a development cycle.

<aside name="maintain">

The second half of this -- maintaining your design -- deserves special
attention. I've seen many programs start out beautifully and then die a death of a
thousand cuts as programmers add "just one tiny little hack" over and over
again.

Like gardening, it's not enough to put in new plants. You must also weed and
prune.

</aside>

You have to think about which parts of the program should be decoupled and
introduce abstractions at those points. Likewise, you have to determine where
extensibility should be engineered in so future changes are easier to make.

People get really excited about this. They envision future developers (or just
their future self) stepping into the codebase and finding it open-ended,
powerful, and just beckoning to be extended. They imagine The One Game Engine To
Rule Them All.

But this is where it starts to get tricky. Whenever you add a layer of
abstraction or a place where extensibility is supported, you're *speculating*
that you will need that flexibility later. You're adding code and complexity to
your game that takes time to develop, debug, and maintain.

That effort pays off if you guess right and end up touching that code later. But
<span name="yagni">predicting</span> the future is *hard*, and when that
modularity doesn't end up being helpful, it quickly becomes actively harmful.
After all, it is more code you have to deal with.

<aside name="yagni">

Some folks coined the term "YAGNI" -- [You aren't gonna need
it](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/You_aren't_gonna_need_it) -- as a mantra used
to fight this urge to speculate about what your future self may want.

</aside>

When people get overzealous about this, you get a codebase whose architecture
has spiraled out of control. You've got interfaces and abstractions everywhere.
Plug-in systems, abstract base classes, virtual methods galore, and all sorts of
extension points.

It takes you forever to trace through all of that scaffolding to find some real
code that does something. When you need to make a change, sure, there's probably
an interface there to help, but good luck finding it. In theory, all of this
decoupling means you have less code to understand before you can extend it, but
the layers of abstraction themselves end up filling your mental scratch disk.

Codebases like this are what turn people *against* software architecture, and
design patterns in particular. It's easy to get so wrapped up in the code itself
that you lose sight of the fact that you're trying to ship a *game*. The siren
song of extensibility sucks in countless developers who spend years working on
an "engine" without ever figuring out what it's an engine *for*.

## Performance and Speed

There's another critique of software architecture and abstraction that you hear
sometimes, especially in game development: that it hurts your game's
performance. Many patterns that make your code more flexible rely on virtual
dispatch, interfaces, pointers, messages, and <span name="templates">other
mechanisms</span> that all have at least some runtime cost.

<aside name="templates">

One interesting counter-example is templates in C++. Template metaprogramming
can sometimes give you the abstraction of interfaces without any penalty at
runtime.

There's a spectrum of flexibility here. When you write code to call a concrete
method in some class, you're fixing that class at *author* time -- you've
hard-coded which class you call into. When you go through a virtual method or
interface, the class that gets called isn't known until *runtime*. That's much
more flexible but implies some runtime overhead.

Template metaprogramming is somewhere between the two. There, you make the
decision of which class to call at *compile time* when the template is
instantiated.

</aside>

There's a reason for this. A lot of software architecture is about making your
program more flexible. It's about making it take less effort to change it. That
means encoding fewer assumptions in the program. You use interfaces so that your
code works with *any* class that implements it instead of just the one that does
today. You use <a href="observer.html" class="gof-pattern">observers</a> and <a
href="event-queue.html" class="pattern">messaging</a> to let two parts of the
game talk to each other so that tomorrow, it can easily be three or four.

But performance is all about assumptions. The practice of optimization thrives
on concrete limitations. Can we safely assume we'll never have more than 256
enemies? Great, we can pack an ID into a single byte. Will we only call a method
on one concrete type here? Good, we can statically dispatch or inline it. Are
all of the entities going to be the same class? Great, we can make a nice <a
href="data-locality.html" class="pattern">contiguous array</a> of them.

This doesn't mean flexibility is bad, though! It lets us change our game
quickly, and *development* speed is absolutely vital for getting to a fun
experience. No one, not even Will Wright, can come up with a balanced game
design on paper. It demands iteration and experimentation.

The faster you can try out ideas and see how they feel, the more you can try and
the more likely you are to find something great. Even after you've found the
right mechanics, you need plenty of time for tuning. A tiny imbalance can wreck
the fun of a game.

There's no easy answer here. Making your program more flexible so you can
prototype faster will have some performance cost. Likewise, optimizing your code
will make it less flexible.

My experience, though, is that it's easier to make a fun game fast than it is to
make a fast game fun. One compromise is to keep the code flexible until the
design settles down and then tear out some of the abstraction later to improve
your performance.

## The Good in Bad Code

That brings me to the next point which is that there's a time and place for
different styles of coding. Much of this book is about making maintainable,
clean code, so my allegiance is pretty clearly to doing things the "right" way,
but there's value in slapdash code too.

Writing well-architected code takes careful thought, and that translates to
time. Moreso, *maintaining* a good architecture over the life of a project takes
a lot of effort. You have to treat your codebase like a good camper does their
campsite: always try to leave it a little better than you found it.

This is good when you're going to be living in and working on that code for a
long time. But, like I mentioned earlier, game design requires a lot of
experimentation and exploration. Especially early on, it's common to write code
that you *know* you'll throw away.

If you just want to find out if some gameplay idea plays right at all,
architecting it beautifully means burning more time before you actually get it
on screen and get some feedback. If it ends up not working, that time spent
making the code elegant goes to waste when you delete it.

Prototyping -- slapping together code that's just barely functional enough to
answer a design question -- is a perfectly legitimate programming practice.
There is a very large caveat, though. If you write throwaway code, you *must*
ensure you're able to throw it away. I've seen bad managers play this game time
and time again:

> Boss: "Hey, we've got this idea that we want to try out. Just a prototype, so
> don't feel you need to do it right. How quickly can you slap something
> together?"

> Dev: "Well, if I cut lots of corners, don't test it, don't document it, and it
> has tons of bugs, I can give you some temp code in a few days."

> Boss: "Great!"

*A few days pass...*

> Boss: "Hey, that prototype is great. Can you just spend a few hours cleaning
> it up a bit now and we'll call it the real thing?"

You need to make sure the people using the <span
name="throwaway">throwaway</span> code understand that even though it kind of
looks like it works, it *cannot* be maintained and *must* be rewritten. If
there's a *chance* you'll end up having to keep it around, you may have to
defensively write it well.

<aside name="throwaway">

One trick to ensuring your prototype code isn't obliged to become real code is
to write it in a language different from the one your game uses. That way, you have to
rewrite it before it can end up in your actual game.

</aside>

## Striking a Balance

We have a few forces in play:

1.  <span name="speed">We</span> want nice architecture so the code is easier to
    understand over the lifetime of the project.
2.  We want fast runtime performance.
3.  We want to get today's features done quickly.

<aside name="speed">

I think it's interesting that these are all about some kind of speed: our
long-term development speed, the game's execution speed, and our short-term
development speed.

</aside>

These goals are at least partially in opposition. Good architecture improves
productivity over the long term, but maintaining it means every change requires
a little more effort to keep things clean.

The implementation that's quickest to write is rarely the quickest to *run*.
Instead, optimization takes significant engineering time. Once it's done, it
tends to calcify the codebase: highly optimized code is inflexible and very
difficult to change.

There's always pressure to get today's work done today and worry about
everything else tomorrow. But if we cram in features as quickly as we can, our
codebase will become a mess of hacks, bugs, and inconsistencies that saps our
future productivity.

There's no simple answer here, just trade-offs. From the email I get, this
disheartens a lot of people. Especially for novices who just want to make a
game, it's intimidating to hear, "There is no right answer, just different
flavors of wrong."

But, to me, this is exciting! Look at any field that people dedicate careers to
mastering, and in the center you will always find a set of intertwined
constraints. After all, if there was an easy answer, everyone would just do
that. A field you can master in a week is ultimately boring. You don't hear of
someone's distinguished career in <span name="ditch">ditch digging</span>.

<aside name="ditch">

Maybe you do; I didn't research that analogy. For all I know, there could be avid
ditch digging hobbyists, ditch digging conventions, and a whole subculture
around it. Who am I to judge?

</aside>

To me, this has much in common with games themselves. A game like chess
can never be mastered because all of the pieces are so perfectly balanced
against one another. This means you can spend your life exploring the vast space
of viable strategies. A poorly designed game collapses to the one winning tactic
played over and over until you get bored and quit.

## Simplicity

Lately, I feel like if there is any method that eases these constraints, it's
*simplicity*. In my code today, I try very hard to write the cleanest, most
direct solution to the problem. The kind of code where after you read it, you
understand exactly what it does and can't imagine any other possible solution.

I aim to get the data structures and algorithms right (in about that order) and
then go from there. I find if I can keep things simple, there's less code
overall. That means less code to load into my head in order to change it.

It often runs fast because there's simply not as much overhead and not much code
to execute. (This certainly isn't always the case though. You can pack a lot of
looping and recursion in a tiny amount of code.)

However, note that I'm not saying <span name="simple">simple code</span> takes
less time to *write*. You'd think it would since you end up with less total
code, but a good solution isn't an accretion of code, it's a *distillation* of
it.

<aside name="simple">

Blaise Pascal famously ended a letter with, "I would have written a shorter
letter, but I did not have the time."

Another choice quote comes from Antoine de Saint-Exupery: "Perfection is
achieved, not when there is nothing more to add, but when there is nothing left
to take away."

Closer to home, I'll note that every time I revise a chapter in this book, it
gets shorter. Some chapters are tightened by 20% by the time they're done.

</aside>

We're rarely presented with an elegant problem. Instead, it's a pile of use
cases. You want the X to do Y when Z, but W when A, and so on. In other words, a
long list of different example behaviors.

The solution that takes the least mental effort is to just code up those use
cases one at a time. If you look at novice programmers, that's what they often
do: they churn out reams of conditional logic for each case that popped into
their head.

But there's nothing elegant in that, and code in that style tends to fall over
when presented with input even slightly different than the examples the coder
considered. When we think of elegant solutions, what we often have in mind is a
*general* one: a small bit of logic that still correctly covers a large space of
use cases.

Finding that is a bit like pattern matching or solving a puzzle. It takes effort
to see through the scattering of example use cases to find the hidden order
underlying them all. It's a great feeling when you pull it off.

## Get On With It, Already

Almost everyone skips the introductory chapters, so I congratulate you on making
it this far. I don't have much in return for your patience, but I'll offer up a
few bits of advice that I hope may be useful to you:

 *  Abstraction and decoupling make evolving your program faster and easier, but
    don't waste time doing them unless you're confident the code in question needs
    that flexibility.

 *  <span name="think">Think</span> about and design for performance throughout
    your development cycle, but put off the low-level, nitty-gritty optimizations
    that lock assumptions into your code until as late as possible.

<aside name="think">

Trust me, two months before shipping is *not* when you want to start worrying
about that nagging little "game only runs at 1 FPS" problem.

</aside>

 *   Move quickly to explore your game's design space, but don't go so fast that
     you leave a mess behind you. You'll have to live with it, after all.

 *   If you are going to ditch code, don't waste time making it pretty. Rock
     stars trash hotel rooms because they know they're going to check out the
     next day.

 *   But, most of all, **if you want to make something fun, have fun making
     it.**
