^title Event Queue
^section Decoupling Patterns

## Intent

*Decouple when a message or event is sent from when it is processed.*

## Motivation

Unless you live under one of the few rocks that still lack Internet access,
you've probably already heard of an <span name="message">"event queue"</span>.
If not, maybe "message queue", or "event loop", or "message pump" rings a bell.
To refresh your memory, let's walk through a couple of common manifestations of
the pattern.

<aside name="message">

For most of the chapter, I use "event" and "message" interchangeably. Where the
distinction matters, I'll make it obvious.

</aside>

### GUI event loops

If you've ever done any <span name="event-driven">user interface</span>
programming, then you're well acquainted with *events*. Every time the user
interacts with your program -- clicks a button, pulls down a menu, or presses a
key -- the operating system generates an event. It throws this object at your
app, and your job is to grab it and hook it up to some interesting behavior.

<aside name="event-driven">

This application style is so common, it's considered a paradigm: <a
href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Event-driven_programming">*event-driven
programming*</a>.

</aside>

In order to receive these missives, somewhere deep in the bowels of your code is
an *event loop*. It looks roughly like this:

^code event-loop

The call to `getNextEvent()` pulls a bit of unprocessed user input into your
app. You route it to an event handler and, like magic, your application comes to
life. The interesting part is that the application *pulls* in the event when
*it* wants it. The operating system doesn't just immediately <span
name="interrupt">jump</span> to some code in your app when the user pokes a
peripheral.

<aside name="interrupt">

In contrast, *interrupts* from the operating system *do* work like that. When an
interrupt happens, the OS stops whatever your app was doing and forces it to
jump to an interrupt handler. This abruptness is why interrupts are so hard to
work with.

</aside>

That means when user input comes in, it needs to go somewhere so that the
operating system doesn't lose it between when the device driver reported the
input and when your app gets around to calling `getNextEvent()`. That
"somewhere" is a *queue*.

<img src="images/event-queue-loop.png" alt="An event queue. The operating system enqueues Shift, Down, Up, and Click events, and the getNextEvent() function dequeues them." />

When user input comes in, the OS adds it to a queue of unprocessed events. When
you call `getNextEvent()`, that pulls the oldest event off the queue and hands it
to your application.

### Central event bus

Most <span name="game-loop">games</span> aren't event-driven like this, but it
is common for a game to have its own event queue as the backbone of its nervous
system. You'll often hear "central", "global", or "main" used to describe it.
It's used for high level communication between game systems that want to stay
decoupled.

<aside name="game-loop">

If you want to know *why* they aren't event-driven, crack open the <a href="game-loop.html"
class="pattern">Game Loop</a> chapter.

</aside>

Say your game has a <span name="tutorial">tutorial</span> system to display help
boxes after specific in-game events. For example, the first time the player
vanquishes a foul beastie, you want to show a little balloon that says, "Press X
to grab the loot!"

<aside name="tutorial">

Tutorial systems are a pain to implement gracefully, and most players will spend
only a fraction of their time using in-game help, so it feels like they aren't
worth the effort. But that fraction where they *are* using the tutorial can be
invaluable for easing the player into your game.

</aside>

Your gameplay and combat code are likely complex enough as it is. The last thing
you want to do is stuff a bunch of checks for triggering tutorials in there.
Instead, you could have a central event queue. Any game system can send to it,
so the combat code can add an "enemy died" event every time you slay a foe.

<span name="blackboard">Likewise</span>, any game system can *receive* events
from the queue. The tutorial engine registers itself with the queue and
indicates it wants to receive "enemy died" events. This way, knowledge of an
enemy dying makes its way from the combat system over to the tutorial engine
without the two being directly aware of each other.

<aside name="blackboard">

This model where you have a shared space that entities can post information to
and get notified by is similar to <a
href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blackboard_system">blackboard systems</a> in
the AI field.

</aside>

<img src="images/event-queue-central.png" alt="A central event queue is read from and written to by the Combat and Tutorial code." />

I thought about using this as the example for the rest of the chapter, but I'm
not generally a fan of big global systems. Event queues don't have to be for
communicating across the entire game engine. They can be just as useful within a single class or domain.

### Say what?

So, instead, let's add sound to our game. Humans are mainly visual animals, but
hearing is deeply connected to our emotions and our sense of physical space. The
right simulated echo can make a black screen feel like an enormous cavern, and a
well-timed violin adagio can make your heartstrings hum in sympathetic
resonance.

To get our game wound for sound, we'll start with the simplest possible approach
and see how it goes. We'll add a little <span name="singleton">"audio
engine"</span> that has an API for playing a sound given an identifier and a
volume:

<aside name="singleton">

While I almost always shy away from the <a href="singleton.html"
class="gof-pattern">Singleton</a> pattern, this is one of the places where it
may fit since the machine likely only has one set of speakers. I'm taking a
simpler approach and just making the method static.

</aside>

^code sync-api

It's responsible for loading the appropriate sound resource, finding an
available channel to play it on, and starting it up. This chapter isn't about
some platform's real audio API, so I'll conjure one up that we can presume is
implemented elsewhere. Using it, we write our method like so:

^code sync-impl

We check that in, create a few sound files, and start sprinkling `playSound()`
calls through our codebase like some magical audio fairy. For example, in our UI
code, we play a little bloop when the selected menu item changes:

^code menu-bloop

After doing this, we notice that sometimes when you switch menu items, the whole
screen freezes for a few frames. We've hit our first issue:

 *  **Problem 1: The API blocks the caller until the audio engine has completely
    processed the request.**

Our `playSound()` method is *synchronous* -- it doesn't return back to the
caller until bloops are coming out of the speakers. If a sound file has to be
loaded from disc first, that may take a while. In the meantime, the rest of the
game is frozen.

Ignoring that for now, we move on. In the AI code, we add a call to let out a
wail of anguish when an enemy takes damage from the player. Nothing warms a
gamer's heart like inflicting simulated pain on a virtual living being.

It works, but sometimes when the hero does a mighty attack, it hits two enemies
in the exact same frame. That causes the game to play the wail sound twice
simultaneously. <span name="hatsworth">If</span> you know anything about audio,
you know mixing multiple sounds together sums their waveforms. When those are
the *same* waveform, it's the same as *one* sound played *twice as loud*. It's
jarringly loud.

<aside name="hatsworth">

I ran into this exact issue working on <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hen
ry_Hatsworth_in_the_Puzzling_Adventure">Henry Hatsworth in the Puzzling
Adventure</a>. My solution there is similar to what we'll cover here.

</aside>

We have a related problem in boss fights when piles of minions are running
around causing mayhem. The hardware can only play so many sounds at one time.
When we go over that limit, sounds get ignored or cut off.

To handle these issues, we need to look at the entire *set* of sound calls to
aggregate and prioritize them. Unfortunately, our audio API handles each
`playSound()` call independently. It sees requests through a pinhole, one at a
time.

 *  **Problem 2: Requests cannot be processed in aggregate.**

These problems seem like mere annoyances compared to the next issue that falls
in our lap. By now, we've strewn `playSound()` calls throughout the codebase in
lots of different game systems. But our game engine is running on modern
multi-core hardware. To take advantage of those cores, we distribute those
systems on different threads -- rendering on one, AI on another, etc.

Since our API is synchronous, it runs on the *caller's* thread. When we call it
from different game systems, we're hitting our API concurrently from multiple
threads. Look at that sample code. See any thread synchronization? Me neither.

This is particularly egregious because we intended to have a *separate* thread
for audio. It's just sitting there totally idle while these other threads are
busy stepping all over each other and breaking things.

 *  **Problem 3: Requests are processed on the wrong thread.**

The common theme to these problems is that the audio engine interprets a call to
`playSound()` to mean, "Drop everything and play the sound right now!"
*Immediacy* is the problem. Other game systems call `playSound()` at *their*
convenience, but not necessarily when it's convenient for the audio engine to
handle that request. To fix that, we'll decouple *receiving* a request from
*processing* it.

## The Pattern

A **queue** stores a series of **notifications or requests** in first-in,
first-out order. Sending a notification **enqueues the request and returns**.
The request processor then **processes items from the queue** at a later time.
Requests can be **handled directly** or **routed to interested parties**. This
**decouples the sender from the receiver** both **statically** and **in time**.

## When to Use It

If you only want to decouple *who* receives a message from its sender, patterns
like <a href="observer.html">Observer</a> and <a href="command.html">Command</a>
will take care of this with less <span name="simple">complexity</span>. You only
need a queue when you want to decouple something *in time*.

<aside name="simple">

I mention this in nearly every chapter, but it's worth emphasizing. Complexity
slows you down, so treat simplicity as a precious resource.

</aside>

I think of it in terms of pushing and pulling. You have some code A that wants
another chunk B to do some work. The natural way for A to initiate that is by
*pushing* the request to B.

Meanwhile, the natural way for B to process that request is by *pulling* it in
at a convenient time in *its* run cycle. When you have a push model on one end
and a pull model on the other, you need a buffer between them. That's what a
queue provides that simpler decoupling patterns don't.

Queues give control to the code that pulls from it -- the receiver can delay
processing, aggregate requests, or discard them entirely. But queues do this by
taking control *away* from the sender. All the sender can do is throw a request on the
queue and hope for the best. This makes queues a poor fit when the sender needs
a response.

## Keep in Mind

Unlike some more modest patterns in this book, event queues are complex and tend
to have a wide-reaching effect on the architecture of our games. That means
you'll want to think hard about how -- or if -- you use one.

### A central event queue is a global variable

One common use of this pattern is for a sort of Grand Central Station that all
parts of the game can route messages through. It's a powerful piece of
infrastructure, but *powerful* doesn't always mean *good*.

It took a while, but most of us learned the hard way that global variables are
bad. When you have a piece of state that any part of the program can poke at,
all sorts of subtle interdependencies creep in. This pattern wraps that state in
a nice little protocol, but it's still a global, with all of the danger that
entails.

### The state of the world can change under you

Say some AI code posts an "entity died" event to a queue when a virtual minion
shuffles off its mortal coil. That event hangs out in the queue for who knows
how many frames until it eventually works its way to the front and gets
processed.

Meanwhile, the experience system wants to track the heroine's body count and
reward her for her grisly efficiency. It receives each "entity died" event
and determines the kind of entity slain and the difficulty of the kill so it
can dish out an appropriate reward.

That requires various pieces of state in the world. We need the entity that died
so we can see how tough it was. We may want to inspect its surroundings to see
what other obstacles or minions were nearby. But if the event isn't received
until later, that stuff may be gone. The entity may have been deallocated, and
other nearby foes may have wandered off.

When you receive an event, you have to be careful not to assume the *current*
state of the world reflects how the world was *when the event was raised*. This
means queued events tend to be more data heavy than events in synchronous systems. With
the latter, the notification can say "something happened" and the receiver
can look around for the details. With a queue, those ephemeral details must be
captured when the event is sent so they can be used later.

### You can get stuck in feedback loops

All event and message systems have to worry about cycles:

 1. A sends an event.
 2. B receives it and responds by sending an event.
 3. That event happens to be one that A cares about, so it receives it. In
    response, it sends an event...
 5. Go to 2.

When your messaging system is *synchronous*, you find cycles quickly -- they
overflow the stack and crash your game. With a queue, the asynchrony unwinds the
stack, so the game may keep running even though spurious events are <span
name="log">sloshing</span> back and forth in there. A common rule to avoid this
is to avoid *sending* events from within code that's *handling* one.

<aside name="log">

A little debug logging in your event system is probably a good idea too.

</aside>

## Sample Code

We've already seen some code. It's not perfect, but it has the right basic
functionality -- the public API we want and the right low-level audio calls. All
that's left for us to do now is fix its problems.

The first is that our API *blocks*. When a piece of code plays a sound, it can't
do anything else until `playSound()` finishes loading the resource and actually
starts making the speaker wiggle.

We want to defer that work until later so that `playSound()` can return quickly.
To do that, we need to *reify* the request to play a sound. We need a little
structure that stores the details of a pending request so we can keep it around
until later:

^code play-message

Next, we need to give `Audio` some storage space to keep track of these pending
play messages. Now, your <span name="prof">algorithms professor</span> might
tell you to use some exciting data structure here like a [Fibonacci
heap](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fibonacci_heap) or a [skip
list](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skip_list), or, hell, at least a *linked*
list. But in practice, the best way to store a bunch of homogenous things is
almost always a plain old array:

<aside name="prof">

Algorithm researchers get paid to publish analyses of novel data structures.
They aren't exactly incentivized to stick to the basics.

</aside>

 *  No dynamic allocation.

 *  No memory overhead for bookkeeping information or pointers.

 *  <span name="locality">Cache-friendly</span> contiguous memory usage.

<aside name="locality">

For lots more on what being "cache friendly" means, see the chapter on <a
href="data-locality.html" class="pattern">Data Locality</a>.

</aside>

So let's do that:

^code pending-array

We can tune the array size to cover our worst case. To play a sound, we simply
slot a new message in there at the end:

^code array-play

This lets `playSound()` return almost instantly, but we do still have to play
the sound, of course. That code needs to go somewhere, and that somewhere is an
`update()` method:

<span name="update"></span>

^code array-update

<aside name="update">

As the name implies, this is the <a href="update-method.html"
class="pattern">Update Method</a> pattern.

</aside>

Now, we need to call that from somewhere convenient. What "convenient" means
depends on your game. It may mean calling it from the main <a
href="game-loop.html" class="pattern">game loop</a> or from a dedicated audio
thread.

This works fine, but it does presume we can process *every* sound request in a
single call to `update()`. If you're doing something like processing a request
asynchronously after its sound resource is loaded, that won't work. For
`update()` to work on one request at a time, it needs to be able to pull
requests out of the buffer while leaving the rest. In other words, we need an
actual queue.

### A ring buffer

There are a bunch of ways to implement queues, but my favorite is called a *ring
buffer*. It preserves everything that's great about arrays while letting us
incrementally remove items from the front of the queue.

Now, I know what you're thinking. If we remove items from the beginning of the
array, don't we have to shift all of the remaining items over? Isn't that slow?

This is why they made us learn linked lists -- you can remove nodes from them
without having to shift things around. Well, it turns out you can implement a
queue without any shifting in an array too. I'll walk you through it, but first
let's get precise on some terms:

 *  The **head** of the queue is where requests are *read* from. The head is the
    oldest pending request.

 *  The **tail** is the other end. It's the slot in the array where the next
    enqueued request will be *written*. Note that it's just *past* the end of
    the queue. You can think of it as a half-open range, if that helps.

Since `playSound()` appends new requests at the end of the array, the head
starts at element zero and the tail grows to the right.

<img src="images/event-queue-queue.png" alt="An array of events. The head points to the first element, and the tail grows to the right." />

Let's code that up. First, we'll tweak our fields a bit to make these two
markers explicit in the class:

^code head-tail

In the implementation of `playSound()`, `numPending_` has been replaced with
`tail_`, but otherwise it's the same:

^code tail-play

The more interesting change is in `update()`:

^code tail-update

We process the request at the head and then discard it by advancing the head
pointer to the right. We detect an <span name="empty">empty queue</span> by
seeing if there's any distance between the head and tail.

<aside name="empty">

This is why we made the tail one *past* the last item. It means that the queue
will be empty if the head and tail are the same index.

</aside>

Now we've got a queue -- we can add to the end and remove from the front.
There's an obvious problem, though. As we run requests through the queue, the
head and tail keep crawling to the right. Eventually, `tail_` hits the end
of the array, and <span name="party">party time</span> is over. This is where it
gets clever.

<aside name="party">

Do you want party time to be over? No. You do not.

</aside>

<img src="images/event-queue-crawl.png" alt="The same array as before but now the head is moving towards the right, leaving available cells on the left." />

Notice that while the tail is creeping forward, the *head* is too. That means
we've got array elements at the *beginning* of the array that aren't being used
anymore. So what we do is wrap the tail back around to the beginning of the
array when it runs off the end. That's why it's called a *ring* buffer -- it acts
like a circular array of cells.

<img src="images/event-queue-ring.png" alt="The array wraps around and now the head can circle back to the beginning." />

Implementing that is remarkably easy. When we enqueue an item, we just need to
make sure the tail wraps around to the beginning of the array when it reaches
the end:

^code ring-play

Replacing `tail_++` with an increment modulo the array size wraps the tail back
around. The other change is the assertion. We need to ensure the queue doesn't
overflow. As long as there are fewer than `MAX_PENDING` requests in the queue,
there will be a little gap of unused cells between the head and the tail. If the
queue fills up, those will be gone and, like some weird backwards Ouroboros, the
tail will collide with the head and start overwriting it. The assertion ensures
that this doesn't happen.

In `update()`, we wrap the head around too:

^code ring-update

There you go -- a queue with <span name="capacity">no dynamic allocation</span>,
no copying elements around, and the cache-friendliness of a simple array.

<aside name="capacity">

If the maximum capacity bugs you, you can use a growable array. When the queue
gets full, allocate a new array twice the size of the current array (or some
other multiple), then copy the items over.

Even though you copy when they array grows, enqueuing an item still has constant
*amortized* complexity.

</aside>

### Aggregating requests

Now that we've got a queue in place, we can move onto the other problems. The
first is that multiple requests to play the same sound end up too loud. Since we
know which requests are waiting to be processed now, all we need to do is merge
a request if it matches an already pending one:

^code drop-dupe-play

When we get two requests to play the same sound, we collapse them to a single
request for whichever is loudest. This "aggregation" is pretty rudimentary, but
we could use the same idea to do more interesting batching.

Note that we're merging when the request is *enqueued*, not when it's
*processed*. That's easier on our queue since we don't waste slots on redundant
requests that will end up being collapsed later. It's also simpler to implement.

It does, however, put the processing burden on the caller. A call to
`playSound()` will walk the entire queue before it returns, which could be <span
name="slow">slow</span> if the queue is large. It may make more sense to
aggregate in `update()` instead.

<aside name="slow">

Another way to avoid the *O(n)* cost of scanning the queue is to use a different
data structure. If we use a hash table keyed on the `SoundId`, then we can check
for duplicates in constant time.

</aside>

There's something important to keep in mind here. The window of "simultaneous"
requests that we can aggregate is only as big as the queue. If we process
requests more quickly and the queue size stays small, then we'll have fewer
opportunities to batch things together. Likewise, if processing lags behind and
the queue gets full, we'll find more things to collapse.

This pattern insulates the requester from knowing when the request gets
processed, but when you treat the entire queue as a live data structure to be
played with, then lag between making a request and processing it can visibly
affect behavior. Make sure you're OK with that before doing this.

### Spanning threads

Finally, the most pernicious problem. With our synchronous audio API, whatever
thread called `playSound()` was the thread that processed the request. That's
often not what we want.

On today's <span name="multicore">multi-core</span> hardware, you need more than
one thread if you want to get the most out of your chip. There are infinite ways
to distribute code across threads, but a common strategy is to move each domain
of the game onto its own thread -- audio, rendering, AI, etc.

<aside name="multicore">

Straight-line code only runs on a single core at a time. If you don't use
threads, even if you do the asynchronous-style programming that's in vogue, the
best you'll do is keep one core busy, which is a fraction of your CPU's
abilities.

Server programmers compensate for that by splitting their application into
multiple independent *processes*. That lets the OS run them concurrently on
different cores. Games are almost always a single process, so a bit of threading
really helps.

</aside>

We're in good shape to do that now that we have three critical pieces:

 1. The code for requesting a sound is decoupled from the code that plays it.

 2. We have a queue for marshalling between the two.

 3. The queue is encapsulated from the rest of the program.

All that's left is to make the methods that modify the queue -- `playSound()`
and `update()` -- thread-safe. Normally, I'd whip up some concrete code to do
that, but since this is a book about architecture, I don't want to get mired in
the details of any specific API or locking mechanism.

At a high level, all we need to do is ensure that the queue isn't modified
concurrently. Since `playSound()` does a very small amount of work -- basically
just assigning a few fields -- it can lock without blocking processing for long.
In `update()`, we wait on something like a condition variable so that we don't
burn CPU cycles until there's a request to process.

## Design Decisions

Many games use event queues as a key part of their communication structure, and
you can spend a ton of time designing all sorts of complex routing and filtering
for messages. But before you go off and build something like the Los Angeles
telephone switchboard, I encourage you to start simple. Here's a few starter
questions to consider:

### What goes in the queue?

I've used "event" and "message" interchangeably so far because it mostly doesn't
matter. You get the same decoupling and aggregation abilities regardless of what
you're stuffing in the queue, but there are some conceptual differences.

 *  **If you queue events:**

    An "event" or "notification" describes something that *already* happened,
    like "monster died". You queue it so that other objects can *respond* to the
    event, sort of like an asynchronous <a href="observer.html"
    class="gof-pattern">Observer</a> pattern.

     *  *You are likely to allow multiple listeners.* Since the queue contains
        things that already happened, the sender probably doesn't care who
        receives it. From its perspective, the event is in the past and is
        already forgotten.

     *  *The scope of the queue tends to be broader.* Event queues are often
        used to *broadcast* events to any and all interested parties. To allow
        maximum flexibility for which parties can be interested, these queues
        tend to be more globally visible.

 *  **If you queue messages:**

    A <span name="command">"message"</span> or "request"
    describes an action that we *want* to happen *in the future*, like "play
    sound". You can think of this as an asynchronous API to a service.

    <aside name="command">

    Another word for "request" is "command", as in the <a href="command.html"
    class="gof-pattern">Command</a> pattern, and queues can be used there too.

    </aside>

     *  *You are more <span name="locator">likely</span> to have a single
        listener.* In the example, the queued messages are requests specifically
        for *the audio API* to play a sound. If other random parts of the game
        engine started stealing messages off the queue, it wouldn't do much
        good.

        <aside name="locator">

        I say "more likely" here, because you can enqueue messages without
        caring which code processes it, as long as it gets processed *how* you
        expect. In that case, you're doing something akin to a <a
        href="service-locator.html" class="pattern">Service Locator</a>.

        </aside>

### Who can read from the queue?

In our example, the queue is encapsulated and only the `Audio` class can read
from it. In a user interface's event system, you can register listeners to your
heart's content. You sometimes hear the terms "single-cast" and "broadcast" to
distinguish these, and both styles are useful.

 *  **A single-cast queue:**

    This is the natural fit when a queue is part of a class's API. Like in our
    audio example, from the caller's perspective, they just see a
    `playSound()` method they can call.

     *  *The queue becomes an implementation detail of the reader.* All the
        sender knows is that it sent a message.

     *  *The queue is more encapsulated.* All other things being equal, more
        encapsulation is usually better.

     *  *You don't have to worry about contention between listeners.* With
        multiple listeners, you have to decide if they *all* get every item
        (broadcast) or if *each* item in the queue is parceled out to *one*
        listener (something more like a work queue).

        In either case, the listeners may end up doing redundant work or
        interfering with each other, and you have to think carefully about the
        behavior you want. With a single listener, that complexity disappears.

 *  **A broadcast queue:**

    This is how most "event" systems work. If you have ten listeners when an
    event comes in, all ten of them see the event.

     *  *Events can get dropped on the floor.* A corollary to the previous point
        is that if you have *zero* listeners, all zero of them see the event. In
        most broadcast systems, if there are no listeners at the point in time
        that an event is processed, the event gets discarded.

     *  *You may need to filter events.* Broadcast queues are often widely
        visible to much of the program, and you can end up with a bunch of
        listeners. Multiply lots of events times lots of listeners, and you end
        up with a ton of event handlers to invoke.

        To cut that down to size, most broadcast event systems let a listener
        winnow down the set of events they receive. For example, they may say
        they only want to receive mouse events or events within a certain
        region of the UI.

 *  **A work queue:**

    Like a broadcast queue, here you have multiple listeners too. The difference
    is that each item in the queue only goes to *one* of them. This is a common
    pattern for parceling out jobs to a pool of concurrently running threads.

     *  *You have to schedule.* Since an item only goes to one listener, the
        queue needs logic to figure out the best one to choose. This may be as
        simple as round robin or random choice, or it could be some more complex
        prioritizing system.

### Who can write to the queue?

This is the flip side of the previous design choice. This pattern works with all
of the possible read/write <span name="configs">configurations</span>:
one-to-one, one-to-many, many-to-one, or many-to-many.

<aside name="configs">

You sometimes hear "fan-in" used to describe many-to-one communication systems
and "fan-out" for one-to-many.

</aside>

 *  **With one writer:**

    This style is most similar to the synchronous <a href="observer.html"
    class="gof-pattern">Observer</a> pattern. You have one
    privileged object that generates events that others can then receive.

     *  *You implicitly know where the event is coming from.* Since there's only
        one object that can add to the queue, any listener can safely assume
        that's the sender.

     *  *You usually allow multiple readers.* You can have a
        one-sender-one-receiver queue, but that starts to feel less like the
        communication system this pattern is about and more like a vanilla queue data
        structure.

 *  **With multiple writers:**

    This is how our audio engine example works. Since `playSound()` is a public
    method, any part of the codebase can add a request to the queue. "Global" or
    "central" event buses work like this too.

     *  *You have to be more careful of cycles.* Since anything can
        potentially put something onto the queue, it's easier to accidentally
        enqueue something in the middle of handling an event. If you aren't
        careful, that may trigger a feedback loop.

     *  *You'll likely want some reference to the sender in the event itself.*
        When a listener gets an event, it doesn't know who sent it, since it
        could be anyone. If that's something they need to know, you'll want to
        pack that into the event object so that the listener can use it.

### What is the lifetime of the objects in the queue?

With a synchronous notification, execution doesn't return to the sender until
all of the receivers have finished processing the message. That means the
message itself can safely live in a local variable on the stack. With a queue,
the message outlives the call that enqueues it.

If you're using a garbage collected language, you don't need to worry about this
too much. Stuff the message in the queue, and it will stick around in memory as
long as it's needed. In C or C++, it's up to you to ensure the object lives long
enough.

 *  **Pass ownership:**

    This is the <span name="unique">traditional</span> way to do things when
    managing memory manually. When a message gets queued, the queue claims it
    and the sender no longer owns it. When it gets processed, the receiver takes
    ownership and is responsible for deallocating it.

    <aside name="unique">

    In C++, `unique_ptr<T>` gives you these exact semantics out of the box.

    </aside>

 *  **Share ownership:**

    These days, now that even C++ programmers are more comfortable with garbage
    collection, <span name="shared">shared</span> ownership is more acceptable.
    With this, the message sticks around as long as anything has a reference to
    it and is automatically freed when forgotten.

    <aside name="shared">

    Likewise, the C++ type for this is `shared_ptr<T>`.

    </aside>

 *  **The queue owns it:**

    <span name="pool">Another option</span> is to have messages *always* live on
    the queue. Instead of allocating the message itself, the sender requests a
    "fresh" one from the queue. The queue returns a reference to a message
    already in memory inside the queue, and the sender fills it in. When the
    message gets processed, the receiver refers to the same message in the
    queue.

    <aside name="pool">

    In other words, the backing store for the queue is an <a
    href="object-pool.html" class="pattern">Object Pool</a>.

    </aside>

## See Also

 *  I've mentioned this a few times already, but in many ways, this pattern is
    the asynchronous cousin to the well-known <a href="observer.html"
    class="gof-pattern">Observer</a> pattern.

 *  Like many patterns, event queues go by a number of aliases. One established
    term is "message queue". It's usually referring to a higher-level
    manifestation. Where our event queues are *within* an application, message
    queues are usually used for communicating *between* them.

    Another term is "publish/subscribe", sometimes abbreviated to "pubsub". Like
    "message queue", it usually refers to larger distributed systems unlike
    the humble coding pattern we're focused on.

 *  A [finite state machine](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite-state_machine),
    similar to the Gang of Four's <a href="state.html"
    class="gof-pattern">State</a> pattern, requires a stream of inputs. If you
    want it to respond to those asynchronously, it makes sense to queue them.

    When you have a bunch of state machines sending messages to each other, each
    with a little queue of pending inputs (called a *mailbox*), then you've
    re-invented the [actor model](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Actor_model) of
    computation.

 *  The [Go](http://golang.org/) programming language's built-in "channel" type
    is essentially an event or message queue.
