^title Observer
^section Design Patterns Revisited

You can't throw a rock at a computer without hitting an application built using
the <span name="devised">[Model-View-Controller][MVC]</span> architecture, and
underlying that is the Observer pattern. Observer is so pervasive that Java put
it in its core library ([`java.util.Observer`][java]) and C# baked it right into
the *language* (the [`event`][event] keyword).

[MVC]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Model%E2%80%93view%E2%80%93controller
[java]: http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/util/Observer.html
[event]: http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/8627sbea.aspx

<aside name="devised">

Like so many things in software, MVC was invented by Smalltalkers in the
seventies. Lispers probably claim they came up with it in the sixties but didn't
bother writing it down.

</aside>

Observer is one of the most widely used and widely known of the original Gang of
Four patterns, but the game development world can be strangely cloistered at
times, so maybe this is all news to you. In case you haven't left the abbey in a
while, let me walk you through a motivating example.

## Achievement Unlocked

Say we're adding an <span name="weasel">achievements</span> system to our game.
It will feature dozens of different badges players can earn for completing
specific milestones like "Kill 100 Monkey Demons", "Fall off a Bridge", or
"Complete a Level Wielding Only a Dead Weasel".

<aside name="weasel">

<img src="images/observer-weasel-wielder.png" width="240" alt="Achievement: Weasel Wielder" />

I swear I had no double meaning in mind when I drew this.

</aside>

This is tricky to implement cleanly since we have such a wide range of
achievements that are unlocked by all sorts of different behaviors. If we aren't
careful, tendrils of our achievement system will twine their way through every
dark corner of our codebase. Sure, "Fall off a Bridge" is somehow tied to the
<span name="physics">physics engine</span>, but do we really want to see a call
to `unlockFallOffBridge()` right in the middle of the linear algebra in our
collision resolution algorithm?

<aside name="physics">

This is a rhetorical question. No self-respecting physics programmer would ever
let us sully their beautiful mathematics with something as pedestrian as
*gameplay*.

</aside>

What we'd like, as always, is to have all the code concerned with one facet of
the game nicely lumped in one place. The challenge is that achievements are
triggered by a bunch of different aspects of gameplay. How can that work without
coupling the achievement code to all of them?

That's what the observer pattern is for. It lets one piece of code announce that
something interesting happened *without actually caring who receives the
notification*.

For example, we've got some physics code that handles gravity and tracks which
bodies are relaxing on nice flat surfaces and which are plummeting toward sure
demise. To implement the "Fall off a Bridge" badge, we could just jam the
achievement code right in there, but that's a mess. Instead, we can just do:

^code physics-update

<span name="subtle">All</span> it does is say, "Uh, I don't know if anyone
cares, but this thing just fell. Do with that as you will."

<aside name="subtle">

The physics engine does have to decide what notifications to send, so it isn't
entirely decoupled. But in architecture, we're most often trying to make systems
*better*, not *perfect*.

</aside>

The achievement system registers itself so that whenever the physics code sends
a notification, the achievement system receives it. It can then check to see if
the falling body is our less-than-graceful hero, and if his perch prior to this
new, unpleasant encounter with classical mechanics was a bridge. If so, it
unlocks the proper achievement with associated fireworks and fanfare, and it
does all of this with no involvement from the physics code.

<span name="tear">In fact</span>, we can change the set of achievements or tear
out the entire achievement system without touching a line of the physics engine.
It will still send out its notifications, oblivious to the fact that nothing is
receiving them anymore.

<aside name="tear">

Of course, if we *permanently* remove achievements and nothing else ever
listens to the physics engine's notifications, we may as well remove the
notification code too. But during the game's evolution, it's nice to have this
flexibility.

</aside>

## How it Works

If you don't already know how to implement the pattern, you could probably
guess from the previous description, but to keep things easy on you, I'll walk
through it quickly.

### The observer

We'll start with the nosy class that wants to know when another object does
something interesting. These inquisitive objects are defined by this interface:

<span name="signature"></span>

^code observer

<aside name="signature">

The parameters to `onNotify()` are up to you. That's why this is the Observer
*pattern* and not the Observer "ready-made code you can paste into your game".
Typical parameters are the object that sent the notification and a generic
"data" parameter you stuff other details into.

If you're coding in a language with generics or templates, you'll probably use
them here, but it's also fine to tailor them to your specific use case. Here,
I'm just hardcoding it to take a game entity and an enum that describes what
happened.

</aside>

Any concrete class that implements this becomes an observer. In our example,
that's the achievement system, so we'd have something like so:

^code achievement-observer

### The subject

The notification method is invoked by the object being observed. In Gang of Four
parlance, that object is called the "subject". It has two jobs. First, it holds
the list of observers that are waiting oh-so-patiently for a missive from it:

<span name="stl"></span>

^code subject-list

<aside name="stl">

In real code, you would use a dynamically-sized collection instead of a dumb
array. I'm sticking with the basics here for people coming from other languages
who don't know C++'s standard library.

</aside>

The important bit is that the subject exposes a *public* API for modifying that
list:

^code subject-register

That allows outside code to control who receives notifications. The subject
communicates with the observers, but it isn't *coupled* to them. In our example,
no line of physics code will mention achievements. Yet, it can still talk to the
achievements system. That's the clever part about this pattern.

It's also important that the subject has a *list* of observers instead of a
single one. It makes sure that observers aren't implicitly coupled to *each
other*. For example, say the audio engine also observes the fall event so that
it can play an appropriate sound. If the subject only supported one observer,
when the audio engine registered itself, that would *un*-register the
achievements system.

That means those two systems would interfere with each other -- and in a
particularly nasty way, since the second would disable the first. Supporting a
list of observers ensures that each observer is treated independently from the
others. As far as they know, each is the only thing in the world with eyes on
the subject.

The other job of the subject is sending notifications:

<span name="concurrent"></span>

^code subject-notify

<aside name="concurrent">

Note that this code assumes observers don't modify the list in their `onNotify()`
methods. A more robust implementation would either prevent or gracefully handle
concurrent modification like that.

</aside>

### Observable physics

Now, we just need to hook all of this into the physics engine so that it can send
notifications and the achievement system can wire itself up to receive them.
We'll stay close to the original *Design Patterns* recipe and <span
name="event">inherit</span> `Subject`:

^code physics-inherit

This lets us make `notify()` in `Subject` protected. That way the derived
physics engine class can call it to send notifications, but code outside of it
cannot. Meanwhile, `addObserver()` and `removeObserver()` are public, so
anything that can get to the physics system can observe it.

<aside name="event">

In real code, I would avoid using inheritance here. Instead, I'd make `Physics`
*have* an instance of `Subject`. Instead of observing the physics engine itself,
the subject would be a separate "falling event" object. Observers could register
themselves using something like:

^code physics-event

To me, this is the difference between "observer" systems and "event" systems.
With the former, you observe *the thing that did something interesting*. With
the latter, you observe an object that represents *the interesting thing that
happened*.

</aside>

Now, when the physics engine does something noteworthy, it calls `notify()`
like in the motivating example before. That walks the observer list and gives
them all the heads up.

<img src="images/observer-list.png" alt="A Subject containing a list of Observer pointers. The first two point to Achievements and Audio." />

Pretty simple, right? Just one class that maintains a list of pointers to
instances of some interface. It's hard to believe that something so
straightforward is the communication backbone of countless programs and app
frameworks.

But the Observer pattern isn't without its detractors. When I've asked other
game programmers what
they think about this pattern, they bring up a few complaints. Let's see what we
can do to address them, if anything.

## "It's Too Slow"

I hear this a lot, often from programmers who don't actually know the details of
the pattern. They have a default assumption that anything that smells like a
"design pattern" must involve piles of classes and indirection and other
creative ways of squandering CPU cycles.

The Observer pattern gets a particularly bad rap here because it's been known to
hang around with some shady characters named "events", <span
name="names">"messages"</span>, and even "data binding". Some of those systems
*can* be slow (often deliberately, and for good reason). They involve things
like queuing or doing dynamic allocation for each notification.

<aside name="names">

This is why I think documenting patterns is important. When we get fuzzy about
terminology, we lose the ability to communicate clearly and succinctly. You say,
"Observer", and someone hears "Events" or "Messaging" because either no one
bothered to write down the difference or they didn't happen to read it.

That's what I'm trying to do with this book. To cover my bases, I've got a
chapter on events and messages too: <a href="event-queue.html"
class="pattern">Event Queue</a>.

</aside>

But, now that you've seen how the pattern is actually implemented, you know that
isn't the case. Sending a notification is simply walking a list and calling some
virtual methods. Granted, it's a *bit* slower than a statically dispatched
call, but that cost is negligible in all but the most performance-critical
code.

I find this pattern fits best outside of hot code paths anyway, so you can
usually afford the dynamic dispatch. Aside from that, there's virtually no
overhead. We aren't allocating objects for messages. There's no queueing. It's
just an indirection over a synchronous method call.

### It's too *fast?*

In fact, you have to be careful because the Observer pattern *is* synchronous.
The subject invokes its observers directly, which means it doesn't resume its
own work until all of the observers have returned from their notification
methods. A slow observer can block a subject.

This sounds scary, but in practice, it's not the end of the world. It's just
something you have to be aware of. UI programmers -- who've been doing
event-based programming like this for ages -- have a time-worn motto for this:
"stay off the UI thread".

If you're responding to an event synchronously, you need to finish and return
control as quickly as possible so that the UI doesn't lock up. When you have
slow work to do, push it onto another thread or a work queue.

You do have to be careful mixing observers with threading and explicit locks,
though. If an observer tries to grab a lock that the subject has, you can
deadlock the game. In a highly threaded engine, you may be better off with
asynchronous communication using an <a href="event-queue.html"
class="pattern">Event Queue</a>.

## "It Does Too Much Dynamic Allocation"

Whole tribes of the programmer clan -- including many game developers -- have
moved onto garbage collected languages, and dynamic allocation isn't the boogie
man that it used to be. But for performance-critical software like games, memory
allocation still matters, even in managed languages. <span
name="fragment">Dynamic</span> allocation takes time, as does reclaiming memory,
even if it happens automatically.

<aside name="fragment">

Many game developers are less worried about allocation and more worried about
*fragmentation.* When your game needs to run continuously for days without
crashing in order to get certified, an increasingly fragmented heap can prevent
you from shipping.

The <a href="object-pool.html" class="pattern">Object Pool</a> chapter goes into
more detail about this and a common technique for avoiding it.

</aside>

In the example code before, I used a fixed array because I'm trying to keep
things dead simple. In real implementations, the observer list is almost always
a dynamically allocated collection that grows and shrinks as observers are
added and removed. That memory churn spooks some people.

Of course, the first thing to notice is that it only allocates memory when
observers are being wired up. *Sending* a notification requires no memory
allocation whatsoever -- it's just a method call. If you hook up your observers
at the start of the game and don't mess with them much, the amount of allocation
is minimal.

If it's still a problem, though, I'll walk through a way to implement adding and
removing observers without any dynamic allocation at all.

### Linked observers

In the code we've seen so far, `Subject` owns a list of pointers to each
`Observer` watching it. The `Observer` class itself has no reference to this
list. It's just a pure virtual interface. Interfaces are preferred over
concrete, stateful classes, so that's generally a good thing.

But if we *are* willing to put a bit of state in `Observer`, we can solve our
allocation problem by threading the subject's list *through the observers
themselves*. Instead of the subject having a separate collection of pointers,
the observer objects become nodes in a linked list:

<img src="images/observer-linked.png" alt="A linked list of Observers. Each has a next_ field pointing to the next one. A Subject has a head_ pointing to the first Observer." />

To implement this, first we'll get rid of the array in `Subject` and replace it
with a pointer to the head of the list of observers:

^code linked-subject

Then we'll extend `Observer` with a pointer to the next observer in the list:

^code linked-observer

We're also making `Subject` a friend class here. The subject owns the API for adding
and removing observers, but the list it will be managing is now inside the
`Observer` class itself. The simplest way to give it the ability to poke at that
list is by making it a friend.

Registering a new observer is just wiring it into the list. We'll take the easy
option and insert it at the front:

^code linked-add

The other option is to add it to the end of the linked list. Doing that adds a
bit more complexity. `Subject` has to either walk the list to find the end or
keep a separate `tail_` pointer that always points to the last node.

Adding it to the front of the list is simpler, but does have one side effect.
When we walk the list to send a notification to every observer, the most
*recently* registered observer gets notified *first*. So if you register
observers A, B, and C, in that order, they will receive notifications in C, B, A
order.

In theory, this doesn't matter one way or the other. It's a tenet of good
observer discipline that two observers observing the same subject should have no
ordering dependencies relative to each other. If the ordering *does* matter, it
means those two observers have some subtle coupling that could end up biting
you.

Let's get removal working:

<span name="remove"></span>

^code linked-remove

<aside name="remove">

Removing a node from a linked list usually requires a bit of ugly special case
handling for removing the very first node, like you see here. There's a more
elegant solution using a pointer to a pointer.

I didn't do that here because it confuses at least half the people I show it to.
It's a worthwhile exercise for you to do, though: It helps you really think in
terms of pointers.

</aside>

Because we have a singly linked list, we have to walk it to find the observer
we're removing. We'd have to do the same thing if we were using a regular array
for that matter. If we use a *doubly* linked list, where each observer has a
pointer to both the observer after it and before it, we can remove an observer
in constant time. If this were real code, I'd do that.

The <span name="chain">only</span> thing left to do is send a notification.
That's as simple as walking the list:

^code linked-notify

<aside name="chain">

Here, we walk the entire list and notify every single observer in it. This
ensures that all of the observers get equal priority and are independent of each
other.

We could tweak this such that when an observer is notified, it can return a flag
indicating whether the subject should keep walking the list or stop. If you do
that, you're pretty close to having the <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki
/Chain-of-responsibility_pattern" class="gof-pattern">Chain of
Responsibility</a> pattern.

</aside>

Not too bad, right? A subject can have as many observers as it wants, without a
single whiff of dynamic memory. Registering and unregistering is as fast as it
was with a simple array. We have sacrificed one small feature, though.

Since we are using the observer object itself as a list node, that implies it
can only be part of one subject's observer list. In other words, an observer can
only observe a single subject at a time. In a more traditional implementation
where each subject has its own independent list, an observer can be in more than
one of them simultaneously.

You may be able to live with that limitation. I find it more common for a
*subject* to have multiple *observers* than vice versa. If it *is* a problem for
you, there is another more complex solution you can use that still doesn't
require dynamic allocation. It's too long to cram into this chapter, but I'll
sketch it out and let you fill in the blanks...

### A pool of list nodes

Like before, each subject will have a linked list of observers. However, those
list nodes won't be the observer objects themselves. Instead, they'll be
separate little "list <span name="intrusive">node</span>" objects that contain a
pointer to the observer and then a pointer to the next node in the list.

<img src="images/observer-nodes.png" alt="A linked list of nodes. Each node has an observer_ field pointing to an Observer, and a next_ field pointing to the next node in the list. A Subject's head_ field points to the first node." />

Since multiple nodes can all point to the same observer, that means an observer
can be in more than one subject's list at the same time. We're back to being
able to observe multiple subjects simultaneously.

<aside name="intrusive">

Linked lists come in two flavors. In the one you learned in school, you have a
node object that contains the data. In our previous linked observer example,
that was flipped around: the *data* (in this case the observer) contained the
*node* (i.e. the `next_` pointer).

The latter style is called an "intrusive" linked list because using an object in
a list intrudes into the definition of that object itself. That makes intrusive
lists less flexible but, as we've seen, also more efficient. They're popular in
places like the Linux kernel where that trade-off makes sense.

</aside>

The way you avoid dynamic allocation is simple: since all of those nodes are the
same size and type, you pre-allocate an <a href="object-pool.html"
class="pattern">Object Pool</a> of them. That gives you a fixed-size pile of
list nodes to work with, and you can use and reuse them as you need without
having to hit an actual memory allocator.

## Remaining Problems

I think we've banished the three boogie men used to scare people off this
pattern. As we've seen, it's simple, fast, and can be made to play nice with
memory management. But does that mean you should use observers all the time?

Now, that's a different question. Like all design patterns, the Observer pattern
isn't a cure-all. Even when implemented correctly and efficiently, it may not be
the right solution. The reason design patterns get a bad rap is because people
apply good patterns to the wrong problem and end up making things worse.

Two challenges remain, one technical and one at something more like the
maintainability level. We'll do the technical one first because those are always
easiest.

### Destroying subjects and observers

The sample code we walked through is solid, but it
<span name="destruct">side-steps</span> an important issue: what happens when
you delete a subject or an
observer? If you carelessly call `delete` on some observer, a subject may still
have a pointer to it. That's now a dangling pointer into deallocated memory.
When that subject tries to send a notification, well... let's just say you're
not going to have a good time.

<aside name="destruct">

Not to point fingers, but I'll note that *Design Patterns* doesn't mention this
issue at all.

</aside>

Destroying the subject is easier since in most implementations, the observer
doesn't have any references to it. But even then, sending the subject's bits to
the memory manager's recycle bin may cause some problems. Those observers may
still be expecting to receive notifications in the future, and they don't know
that that will never happen now. They aren't observers at all, really, they just
think they are.

You can deal with this in a couple of different ways. The simplest is to do what
I did and just punt on it. It's an observer's job to unregister itself from any
subjects when it gets deleted. More often than not, the observer *does* know
which subjects it's observing, so it's usually just a matter of <span
name="destructor">adding</span> a `removeObserver()` call to its destructor.

<aside name="destructor">

As is often the case, the hard part isn't doing it, it's *remembering* to do it.

</aside>

If you don't want to leave observers hanging when a subject gives up the ghost,
that's easy to fix. Just have the subject send one final "dying breath"
notification right before it gets destroyed. That way, any observer can receive
that and take <span name="mourn">whatever action</span> it thinks is
appropriate.

<aside name="mourn">

Mourn, send flowers, compose elegy, etc.

</aside>

People -- even those of us who've spent enough time in the company of machines
to have some of their precise nature rub off on us -- are reliably terrible at
being reliable. That's why we invented computers: they don't make the mistakes
we so often do.

A safer answer is to make observers automatically unregister themselves from
every subject when they get destroyed. If you implement the logic for that once
in your base observer class, everyone using it doesn't have to remember to do it
themselves. This does add some complexity, though. It means each *observer* will
need a list of the *subjects* it's observing. You end up with pointers going in
both directions.

### Don't worry, I've got a GC

All you cool kids with your hip modern languages with garbage collectors are
feeling pretty smug right now. Think you don't have to worry about this because
you never explicitly delete anything? Think again!

Imagine this: you've got some UI screen that shows a bunch of stats about the
player's character like their health and stuff. When the player brings up the
screen, you instantiate a new object for it. When they close it, you just forget
about the object and let the GC clean it up.

Every time the character takes a punch to the face (or elsewhere, I suppose), it
sends a notification. The UI screen observes that and updates the little health
bar. Great. Now what happens when the player dismisses the screen, but you don't
unregister the observer?

The UI isn't visible anymore, but it won't get garbage collected since the
character's observer list still has a reference to it. Every time the screen is
loaded, we add a new instance of it to that increasingly long list.

The entire time the player is playing the game, running around, and getting in
fights, the character is sending notifications that get received by *all* of
those screens. They aren't on screen, but they receive notifications and waste
CPU cycles updating invisible UI elements. If they do other things like play
sounds, you'll get noticeably wrong behavior.

This is such a common issue in notification systems that it has a name: the
<span name="lapsed">*lapsed listener problem*</span>. Since subjects retain
references to their listeners, you can end up with zombie UI objects lingering
in memory. The lesson here is to be disciplined about unregistration.

<aside name="lapsed">

An even surer sign of its significance: it has [a Wikipedia
article](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lapsed_listener_problem).

</aside>

### What's going on?

The other, deeper issue with the Observer pattern is a direct consequence of its
intended purpose. We use it because it helps us loosen the coupling between two
pieces of code. It lets a subject indirectly communicate with some observer
without being statically bound to it.

This is a real win when you're trying to reason about the subject's behavior,
and any hangers-on would be an annoying distraction. If you're poking at the
physics engine, you really don't want your editor -- or your mind -- cluttered
up with a bunch of stuff about achievements.

On the other hand, if your program isn't working and the bug spans some chain of
observers, reasoning about that communication flow is much more difficult. With
an explicit coupling, it's as easy as looking up the method being called. This
is child's play for your average IDE since the coupling is static.

But if that coupling happens through an observer list, the only way to tell who
will get notified is by seeing which observers happen to be in that list *at
runtime*. Instead of being able to *statically* reason about the communication
structure of the program, you have to reason about its *imperative, dynamic*
behavior.

My guideline for how to cope with this is pretty simple. If you often need to
think about *both* sides of some communication in order to understand a part of
the program, don't use the Observer pattern to express that linkage. Prefer
something more explicit.

When you're hacking on some big program, you tend to have lumps of it that you
work on all together. We have lots of terminology for this like "separation of
concerns" and "coherence and cohesion" and "modularity", but it boils down to
"this stuff goes together and doesn't go with this other stuff".

The observer pattern is a great way to let those mostly unrelated lumps talk to
each other without them merging into one big lump. It's less useful *within* a
single lump of code dedicated to one feature or aspect.

That's why it fits our example well: achievements and physics are almost entirely
unrelated domains, likely implemented by different people. We want the bare
minimum of communication between them so that working on either one doesn't
require much knowledge of the other.

## Observers Today

*Design Patterns* came out in <span name="90s">1994</span>. Back then,
object-oriented programming was *the* hot paradigm. Every programmer on Earth
wanted to "Learn OOP in 30 Days," and middle managers paid them based on the
number of classes they created. Engineers judged their mettle by the depth of
their inheritance hierarchies.

<aside name="90s">

That same year, Ace of Base had not one but *three* hit singles, so that may
tell you something about our taste and discernment back then.

</aside>

The Observer pattern got popular during that zeitgeist, so it's no surprise that
it's class-heavy. But mainstream coders now are more comfortable with functional
programming. Having to implement an entire interface just to receive a
notification doesn't fit today's aesthetic.

It feels <span name="different">heavyweight</span> and rigid. It *is*
heavyweight and rigid. For example, you can't have a single class that uses
different notification methods for different subjects.

<aside name="different">

This is why the subject usually passes itself to the observer. Since an observer
only has a single `onNotify()` method, if it's observing multiple subjects, it
needs to be able to tell which one called it.

</aside>

A more modern approach is for an "observer" to be only a reference to a method
or function. In languages with first-class functions, and especially ones with
<span name="closures">closures</span>, this is a much more common way to do
observers.

<aside name="closures">

These days, practically *every* language has closures. C++ overcame the challenge
of closures in a language without garbage collection, and even Java finally got
its act together and introduced them in JDK 8.

</aside>

For example, C# has "events" baked into the language. With those, the observer
you register is a "delegate", which is that language's term for a reference to a
method. In JavaScript's event system, observers *can* be objects supporting a
special `EventListener` protocol, but they can also just be functions. The
latter is almost always what people use.

If I were designing an observer system today, I'd make it <span
name="function">function-based</span> instead of class-based. Even in C++, I
would tend toward a system that let you register member function pointers as
observers instead of instances of some `Observer` interface.

<aside name="function">

[Here's][delegate] an interesting blog post on one way to implement this in C++.

[delegate]: http://molecularmusings.wordpress.com/2011/09/19/generic-type-safe-delegates-and-events-in-c/

</aside>

## Observers Tomorrow

Event systems and other observer-like patterns are incredibly common these days.
They're a well-worn path. But if you write a few large apps using them, you
start to notice something. A lot of the code in your observers ends up looking
the same. It's usually something like:

  1. Get notified that some state has changed.

  2. Imperatively modify some chunk of UI to reflect the new state.

It's all, "Oh, the hero health is 7 now? Let me set the width of the health bar
to 70 pixels." After a while, that gets pretty tedious. Computer science
academics and software engineers have been trying to eliminate that tedium for a
*long* time. Their attempts have gone under a number of different names:
"dataflow programming", "functional reactive programming", etc.

While there have been some successes, usually in limited domains like audio
processing or chip design, the Holy Grail still hasn't been found. In the
meantime, a less ambitious approach has started gaining traction. Many recent
application frameworks now use "data binding".

Unlike more radical models, data binding doesn't try to entirely eliminate
imperative code and doesn't try to architect your entire application around a
giant declarative dataflow graph. What it does do is automate the busywork where
you're tweaking a UI element or calculated property to reflect a change to some
value.

Like other declarative systems, data binding is probably a bit too slow and
complex to fit inside the core of a game engine. But I would be surprised if I
didn't see it start making inroads into less critical areas of the game like
UI.

In the meantime, the good old Observer pattern will still be here waiting for
us. Sure, it's not as exciting as some hot technique that manages to cram both
"functional" and "reactive" in its name, but it's dead simple and it works. To
me, those are often the two most important criteria for a solution.
