^title Service Locator
^section Decoupling Patterns

## Intent

*Provide a global point of access to a service without coupling users to the
concrete class that implements it.*

## Motivation

Some objects or systems in a game tend to get around, visiting almost every
corner of the codebase. It's hard to find a part of the game that *won't* need a
memory allocator, logging, the file system, or random numbers at some point.
Systems like those can be thought of as *services* that need to be available to
the entire game.

For our example, we'll consider audio. It doesn't have quite the reach of
something lower-level like a memory allocator, but it still touches a bunch of
game systems: A falling rock hits the ground with a crash (physics). A sniper
NPC fires his rifle and a shot rings out (AI). The user selects a menu item with
a beep of confirmation (user interface).

Each of these places will need to be able to call into the audio system, with
something like one of these:

^code 15

Either gets us where we're trying to go, but we stumbled into some sticky
coupling along the way. Every place in the game calling into our audio system
directly references the concrete AudioSystem class and the mechanism for
accessing it -- either as a static class or a <a class="gof-pattern"
href="singleton.html">singleton</a>.

These callsites, of course, have to be coupled to *something* in order to make a
sound play, but letting them poke directly at the concrete audio implementation
is like giving a hundred strangers directions to your house just so they can
drop a letter on your doorstep. Not only is it a little bit *too* personal, it's
a real pain when you move and you have to tell each person the new directions.

There's a better solution: a phone book. People that need to get in touch with
us can look us up by name and get our current address. When we move, we tell the
phone company. They update the book, and everyone gets the new address. In fact,
we don't even need to give out our real address at all. We can list a P.O. box
or some other "representation" of ourselves instead. By having callers go
through the book to find us, we have *a convenient single place where we control
how we're found.*

This is the Service Locator pattern in a nutshell: it decouples code that needs
a service from both *who* it is (the concrete implementation type) and *where*
it is (how we get to the instance of it).

## The Pattern

A **service** class defines an abstract interface to a set of operations. A
concrete **service provider** implements this interface. A separate **service
locator** provides access to the service by finding an appropriate provider
while hiding both the provider's concrete type and the process used to locate
it.

## When to Use It

Anytime you make something globally accessible to every part of your program,
you're asking for trouble. That's the main problem with the <a
class="gof-pattern" href="singleton.html">Singleton</a> pattern, and this
pattern is no different. My simplest advice for when to use a service locator
is: *sparingly*.

Instead of using a global mechanism to give some code access to an object it
needs, first consider *just passing the object to it*. That's dead simple, and
it makes the coupling completely obvious. That will cover most of your needs.

*But...* there are some times when manually passing around an object is
gratuitous or actively makes code harder to read. Some systems, like logging or
memory management, shouldn't be part of a module's public API. The parameters to
your rendering code should have to do with *rendering*, not stuff like logging.

Likewise, other systems represent facilities that are fundamentally singular in
nature. Your game probably only has one audio device or display system that it
can talk to. It is an ambient property of the environment, so plumbing it
through ten layers of methods just so one deeply nested call can get to it is
adding needless complexity to your code.

In those kinds of cases, this pattern can help. As we'll see, it functions as a
more flexible, more configurable cousin of the singleton. When used <span
name="well">well</span>, it can make your codebase more flexible with little
runtime cost.

<aside name="well">

Conversely, when used poorly, it carries with it all of the baggage of the
Singleton pattern with worse runtime performance.

</aside>

## Keep in Mind

The core difficulty with a service locator is that it takes a dependency -- a
bit of coupling between two pieces of code -- and defers wiring it up until
runtime. This gives you flexibility, but the price you pay is that it's harder
to understand what your dependencies are just by reading the code.

### The service actually has to be located

With a singleton or a static class, there's no chance for the instance we need
to *not* be available. Calling code can take for granted that it's there. But
since this pattern has to *locate* the service, we may need to handle cases
where that fails. Fortunately, we'll cover a strategy later to address this and
guarantee that we'll always get *some* service when you need it.

### The service doesn't know who is locating it

Since the locator is globally accessible, any code in the game could be
requesting a service and then poking at it. This means that service must be able
to work correctly in any circumstance. For example, a class that expects to only
be used during the simulation portion of the game loop and not during rendering
may not work as a service -- it wouldn't be able to ensure that it's being used
at the right time. So, if a class expects to only be used in a certain context,
it's safest to avoid exposing it to the entire world with this pattern.

## Sample Code

Getting back to our audio system problem, let's address it by exposing the
system to the rest of the codebase through a service locator.

### The service

We'll start off with the audio API. This is the interface that our service will
be exposing:

^code 9

A real audio engine would be much more complex than this, of course, but this
shows the basic idea. What's important is that it's an abstract interface class
with no implementation bound to it.

### The service provider

By itself, our audio interface isn't very useful. We need a concrete
implementation. This book isn't about how to write audio code for a game
console, so you'll have to imagine there's some actual code in the bodies of
these functions, but you get the idea:

^code 10

Now we have an interface and an implementation. The remaining piece is the
service locator -- the class that ties the two together.

### A simple locator

The implementation here is about the simplest kind of service locator you can
define:

<span name="di"></span>

^code 1

<aside name="di">

The technique this uses is called *dependency injection*, an awkward bit of
jargon for a very simple idea. Say you have one class that depends on another.
In our case, our `Locator` class needs an instance of the `Audio` service.
Normally, the locator would be responsible for constructing that itself.
Dependency injection instead says that outside code is responsible for
*injecting* that dependency into the object that needs it.

</aside>

The static `getAudio()` function does the locating -- we can call it from
anywhere in the codebase and it will give us back an instance of our `Audio`
service to use:

^code 5

The way it "locates" is very simple: it relies on some outside code to register
a service provider before any tries to use the service. When the game is
starting up, it calls some code like this:

^code 11

The key part to notice here is that our `someGameCode()` function isn't aware of
the concrete `ConsoleAudio` class, just the abstract `Audio` interface. Equally
important, not even the *locator* class is coupled to the concrete service
provider. The *only* place in code that knows about the actual concrete class is
the initialization function that registers the service.

There's one more level of decoupling here: the `Audio` interface isn't aware of
the fact that it's being accessed in most places through a service locator. As
far as it knows, it's just a regular abstract base class. This is useful because
it means we can apply this pattern to *existing* classes that weren't
necessarily designed around it. This is in contrast with <a class="gof-pattern"
href="singleton.html">Singleton</a>, which affects the design of the "service"
class itself.

### A null service

Our implementation so far is certainly simple, and it's pretty flexible too. But
it has one big shortcoming: if we try to use the service <span
name="temporal">before</span> a provider has been registered, it returns `NULL`.
If the calling code doesn't check that, we're going to crash the game.

<aside name="temporal">

I sometimes hear this called "temporal coupling": two separate pieces of code
that must be called in the right order for the program to work correctly. All
stateful software has some degree of this, but as with other kinds of coupling,
reducing it makes the codebase easier to manage.

</aside>

Fortunately, there's another design pattern called "Null Object" that we can use
to address this. The basic idea is that in places where we would return `NULL`
when we fail to find or create an object, we instead return a special object
that implements the same interface as the desired object. Its implementation
basically does nothing, but allows code that receives the object to safely
continue on as if it had received a "real" one.

To use this, we'll define another "null" service provider:

^code 7

As you can see, it implements the service interface, but doesn't actually do
anything. Now, we change our locator to this:

<span name="ref"></span>

^code 8

<aside name="ref">

You may notice we're returning the service by reference instead of by pointer
now. Since references in C++ are (in theory!) never `NULL`, returning a
reference is a hint to users of the code that they can expect to always get a
valid object back.

The other thing to notice is that we're checking for `NULL` in the `provide()`
function instead of the accessor. That requires us to call `initialize()` early
on to make sure that the Locator initially correctly defaults to the null
provider. In return, it moves the branch out of `getAudio()`, which will save us
a couple of cycles every time the service is accessed.

</aside>

Calling code will never know that a "real" service wasn't found, nor does it
have to worry about handling `NULL`. It's guaranteed to always get back a valid
object.

This is also useful for *intentionally* failing to find services. If we want to
<span name="disable">disable</span> a system temporarily, we now have an easy
way to do so: simply don't register a provider for the service and the locator
will default to a null provider.

<aside name="disable">

Turning off audio is handy during development. It frees up some memory and CPU
cycles. More importantly, when you break into a debugger just as a loud sound
starts playing, it saves you from having your eardrums shredded. There's nothing
like twenty milliseconds of a scream sound effect looping at full volume to get
your blood flowing in the morning.

</aside>

### Logging decorator

Now that our system is pretty robust, let's discuss another refinement this
pattern lets us do: decorated services. I'll explain with an example.

During development, a little logging when interesting events occur can help you
figure out what's going on under the hood of your game engine. If you're working
on AI, you'd like to know when an entity changes AI states. If you're the sound
programmer, you may want a record of every sound as it plays so you can check
that they trigger in the right order.

The typical solution is to just litter the code with calls to some `log()`
function. Unfortunately, that replaces one problem with another: now we have
*too much* logging. The AI coder really doesn't care when sounds are playing,
and the sound person doesn't care about AI state transitions, but now they both
have to wade through each other's messages.

Ideally, we would be able to selectively enable logging for just the stuff we
care about, and in the final game build, there'd be no logging at all. If the
different systems we want to conditionally log are exposed as services, then we
can solve this using the <a class="gof-pattern"
href="http://www.c2.com/cgi/wiki?DecoratorPattern">Decorator</a> pattern. Let's
define another audio service provider implementation like this:

^code 12

As you can see, it wraps another audio provider and exposes the same interface.
It forwards the actual audio behavior to the inner provider, but also logs each
sound call. If a programmer wants to enable audio logging, they call this:

^code 13

Now any calls to the audio service will be logged before continuing as before.
And, of course, this plays nicely with our null service, so you can both
*disable* audio and yet still log the sounds that it *would* play if sound were
enabled.

## Design Decisions

We've covered a typical implementation, but there's a couple of ways that it can
vary, based on differing answers to a few core questions:

### How is the service located?

 *  **Outside code registers it:**

    This is the mechanism our sample code uses to locate the service, and is the
    most common design I see in games:

     *  *It's fast and simple.* The `getAudio()` function simply returns a
        pointer. It will often get inlined by the compiler, so we get a nice
        abstraction layer at almost no performance cost.

     *  *We control how the provider is constructed.* Consider a service for
        accessing the game's controllers. We have two concrete providers: one
        for regular games and one for playing online. The online provider passes
        controller input over the network so that, to the rest of the game,
        remote players appear to just be using local controllers.

        To make this work, the online concrete provider needs to know the IP
        address of the other remote player. If the locator itself was
        constructing the object, how would it know what to pass in? The locator
        class doesn't know anything about online at all, much less some other
        user's IP address.

        Externally registered providers dodge the problem. Instead of the
        locator constructing the class, the game's networking code instantiates
        the online-specific service provider, passing in the IP address it
        needs. Then it gives that to the locator, who knows only about the
        service's abstract interface.

     *  *We can change the service while the game is running.* We may not use
        this in the final game, but it's a neat trick during development. While
        testing, we can swap out, for example, the audio service with the null
        service we talked about earlier to temporarily disable sound while the
        game is still running.

     *  *The locator depends on outside code.* This is the downside. Any code
        accessing the service presumes that some code somewhere has already
        registered it. If that initialization doesn't happen, we'll either crash
        or have a service mysteriously not working.

 *  **Bind to it at compile time:**

    The idea here is that the "location" process actually occurs at compile time
    using preprocessor macros. Like so:

    ^code 2

    Locating the service like this implies a few things:

     *  *It's fast.* Since all of the real work is done at compile time, there's
        nothing left to do at runtime. The compiler will likely inline the
        `getAudio()` call, giving us a solution that's as fast as we could hope
        for.

     *  *You can guarantee the service is available.* Since the locator owns the
        service now and selects it at compile time, we can be assured that if
        the game compiles, we won't have to worry about the service being
        unavailable.

     *  *You can't change the service easily.* This is the major downside. Since
        the binding happens at build time, any time you want to change the
        service, you've got to recompile and restart the game.

 *  **Configure it at runtime:**

    Over in the khaki-clad land of enterprise business software, if you say
    "service locator", this is what they'll have in mind. When the service is
    requested, the locator does some <span name="reflection">magic</span> at
    runtime to hunt down the actual implementation requested.

    <aside name="reflection">

    *Reflection* is a capability of some programming languages to interact with
    the type system at runtime. For example, we could find a class with a given
    name, find its constructor, and then invoke it to create an instance.

    Dynamically-typed languages like Lisp, Smalltalk, and Python get this by
    their very nature, but newer static languages like C# and Java also support
    it.

    </aside>

    Typically, this means loading a configuration file that identifies the
    provider, then using reflection to instantiate that class at runtime. This
    does a few things for us:

     *  *We can swap out the service without recompiling.* This is a little more
        flexible than a compile-time bound service, but not quite as flexible as
        a registered one where you can actually change the service while the
        game is running.

     *  *Non-programmers can change the service.* This is nice for when the
        designers want to be able to turn certain game features on and off, but
        aren't comfortable mucking through source code. (Or, more likely, the
        *coders* aren't comfortable with them mucking through it.)

     *  *The same codebase can support multiple configurations simultaneously.*
        Since the location process has been moved out of the codebase entirely,
        we can use the same code to support multiple service configurations
        simultaneously.

        This is one of the reasons this model is appealing over in enterprise
        web-land: you can deploy a single app that works on different server
        set-ups just by changing some configs. It's less useful in games.
        Console hardware is pretty well standardized, and even PC games target a
        certain baseline specification.

     *  *It's complex.* Unlike the previous solutions, this one is pretty
        heavyweight. You have to create some configuration system, possibly
        write code to load and parse a file, and generally *do some stuff* to
        locate the service. Time spent writing this code is time not spent on
        other game features.

     *  *Locating the service takes time.* And now the smiles really turn to
        frowns. Going with runtime configuration means you're burning some CPU
        cycles locating the service. Caching can minimize this, but that still
        implies that the first time you use the service, the game's got to go
        off and spend some time hunting it down. Game developers *hate* burning
        CPU cycles on something that doesn't improve the player's game
        experience.

### What happens if service could not be located?

 *  **Let the user handle it:**

    The simplest solution is to pass the buck. If the locator can't find the
    service, it just returns `NULL`. This implies:

     *  *It lets users determine how to handle failure.* Some users may consider
        failing to find a service a critical error that should halt the game.
        Others may be able to safely ignore it and continue. If the locator
        can't define a blanket policy that's correct for all cases, then passing
        the failure down the line lets each callsite decide for itself what the
        right response is.

     *  *Users of the service must handle the failure.* Of course, the corollary
        to this is that each callsite *must* check for failure to find the
        service. If almost all of them handle failure the same way, that's a lot
        duplicate code spread throughout the codebase. If just one of the
        potentially hundreds of places that use the service fails to make that
        check, our game is going to crash.

 *  **Halt the game:**

    I said that we can't *prove* that the service will always be available at
    compile-time, but that doesn't mean we can't *declare* that availability is
    part of the runtime contract of the locator. The simplest way to do this is
    with an assertion:

    <span name="assert"></span>

    ^code 4

    <aside name="assert">

    An *assertion* function is a way of embedding a contract into your code.
    When `assert()` is called, it evaluates the expression passed to it. If it
    evaluates to `true`, then it does nothing and lets the game continue. If it
    evaluates to `false`, it immediately halts the game at that point. In a
    debug build, it will usually bring up the debugger or at least print out the
    file and line number where the assertion failed.

    An `assert()` means, "I assert that this should always be true. If it's not,
    that's a bug and I want to stop *now* so you can fix it." This lets you
    define contracts between regions of code. If a function asserts that one of
    its arguments is not `NULL`, that says, "The contract between me and the
    caller is that I will not be passed `NULL`."

    Assertions help us track down bugs as soon as the game does something
    unexpected, and not later when that error finally manifests as something
    visibly wrong to the user. They are fences in your codebase, corralling bugs
    so that they can't escape from the code that created them.

    </aside>

    If the service isn't located, the game stops before any subsequent code
    tries to use it. The `assert()` call there doesn't solve the problem of
    failing to locate the service, but it does make it clear whose problem it
    is. By asserting here, we say, "failing to locate a service is a bug in the
    locator."

    So what does this do for us?

     *  *Users don't need to handle a missing service.* Since a single service
        may be used in hundreds of places, this can be a significant code
        saving. By declaring it the locator's job to always provide a service,
        we spare the users of it from having to pick up that slack.

     *  *The game is going to halt if the service can't be found.* On the off
        chance that a service really can't be found, the game is going to halt.
        This is good in that it forces us to address the bug that's preventing
        the service from being located (likely some initialization code isn't
        being called when it should), but it's a real drag for everyone else
        who's blocked until it's fixed. With a large dev team, you can incur
        some painful programmer downtime when something like this breaks.

 *  **Return a null service:**

    We showed this refinement in our sample implementation. Using this means:

     *  *Users don't need to handle a missing service.* Just like the previous
        option, we ensure that a valid service object will always be returned,
        simplifying code that uses the service.

     *  *The game will continue if the service isn't available.* This is both a
        boon and a curse. It's helpful in that it lets us keep running the game
        even when a service isn't there. This can be really helpful on a large
        team when a feature we're working on may be dependent on some other
        system that isn't in place yet.

        The downside is that it may be harder to debug an *unintentionally*
        missing service. Say the game uses a service to access some data and
        then make a decision based on it. If we've failed to register the real
        service and that code gets a null service instead, the game may not
        behave like we want. <span name="null">It</span> will take some work to
        trace that issue back to the fact that a service wasn't there when we
        thought it would be.

        <aside name="null">

        We can alleviate this by having the null service print some debug output
        whenever it's used.

        </aside>

Among these options, the one I see used most frequently is simply asserting that
the service will be found. By the time a game gets out the door, it's been very
heavily tested, and it will likely be run on a reliable piece of hardware. The
chances of a service failing to be found by then are pretty slim.

On a larger team, I encourage you to throw a null service in. It doesn't take
much effort to implement, and can spare you from some downtime during
development when a service isn't available. It also gives you an easy way to
turn a service off if it's buggy or is just distracting you from what you're
working on.

### What is the scope of the service?

Up to this point, we've assumed that the locator will provide access to the
service to *anyone* who wants it. While this is the typical way the pattern is
used, another option is to limit access to a single class and its descendants,
like so:

^code 3

With this, access to the service is restricted to classes that inherit `Base`.
There are advantages either way:

 *  **If access is global:**

     *  *It encourages the entire codebase to all use the same service.* Most
        services are intended to be singular. By allowing the entire codebase to
        have access to the same service, we can avoid random places in code
        instantiating their own providers because they can't get to the "real"
        one.

     *  *We lose control over where and when the service is used.* This is the
        obvious cost of making something global: anything can get to it. The <a
        class="gof-pattern" href="singleton.html">Singleton</a> chapter has a
        full cast of characters for the horrorshow that global scope can spawn.

 *  **If access is restricted to a class:**

     *  *We control coupling.* This is the main advantage. By limiting a service
        to a branch of the inheritance tree, we can make sure systems that
        should be decoupled stay decoupled.

     *  *It can lead to duplicate effort.* The potential downside is that if a
        couple of unrelated classes *do* need access to the service, they'll
        each need to have their own reference to it. Whatever process is used to
        locate or register the service will have to be duplicated between those
        classes.

        (The other option is to change the class hierarchy around to give those
        classes a common base class, but that's probably more trouble than it's
        worth.)

My general guideline is that if the service is restricted to a single domain in
the game, then limit its scope to a class. For example, a service for getting
access to the network can probably be limited to online classes. Services that
get used more widely like logging should be global.

## See Also

 *  The Service Locator pattern is a sibling to <a class="gof-pattern"
    href="singleton.html">Singleton</a> in many ways, so it's worth looking at
    both to see which is most appropriate for your needs.

 *  The [Unity](http://unity3d.com) framework uses this pattern in concert with
    the <a href="component.html" class="pattern">Component</a> pattern in its
    [`GetComponent()`][get-component] method.

 *  Microsoft's [XNA][] framework for game development has this pattern built
    into its core `Game` class. Each instance has a `GameServices` object that
    can be used to register and locate services of any type.

[get-component]: http://docs.unity3d.com/412/Documentation/ScriptReference/Component.GetComponent.html?from=index
[xna]: http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/microsoft.xna.framework.game.services.aspx
