^title Spatial Partition
^section Optimization Patterns

## Intent

*Efficiently locate nearby objects by storing them in a data structure organized
by their positions.*

## Motivation

Games let us visit other worlds, but those worlds typically aren't so different
from our own. They often share the same basic physics and tangibility of our
world. This is why they can feel real despite being crafted of mere bits and
pixels.

One bit of fake reality that we'll focus on here is *location*. Game worlds have
a sense of *space*, and objects are somewhere in that space. This manifests
itself in a bunch of ways. The obvious one is physics -- objects move, collide,
and interact -- but there are other examples. The audio engine may take into
account where sound sources are relative to the player so that distant sounds
are quieter. Online chat may be restricted to nearby players.

This means your game engine often needs to answer to the question, "What objects
are near this location?" If it has to answer this enough times each frame, it
can start to be a performance bottleneck.

### Units on the field of battle

Say we're making a real-time strategy game. Opposing armies with hundreds of
units will clash together on the field of battle. Warriors need to know which
nearby enemy to swing their blade at. The naïve way to handle this is by looking
at every pair of units and seeing how close they are to each other:

^code pairwise

Here we have a doubly-nested loop where each loop is walking <span
name="all">all</span> of the units on the battlefield. That means the number of
pairwise tests we have to perform each frame increases with the *square* of the
number of units. Each additional unit we add has to be compared to *all* of the
previous ones. With a large number of units, that can spiral out of control.

<aside name="all">

The inner loop doesn't actually walk all of the units. It only walks the ones
the outer loop hasn't already visited. This avoids comparing each pair of units
*twice*, once in each order. If we've already handled a collision between A and
B, we don't need to check it again for B and A.

In Big-O terms, though, this is still *O(n&sup2;)*.

</aside>

### Drawing battle lines

The problem we're running into is that there's no underlying order to the array
of units. To find a unit near some location, we have to walk the entire array.
Now imagine we simplify our game a bit. Instead of a 2D battle*field*, imagine
it's a 1D battle*line*.

<img src="images/spatial-partition-battle-line.png" />

In that case, we could make things easier on ourselves by *sorting* the array of
units by their position on the battleline. Once we do that, we can use something
<span name="array">like</span> a [binary
search](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary_search) to find nearby units without
having to scan the entire array.

<aside name="array">

A binary search has *O(log n)* complexity, which means find all battling units
goes from *O(n&sup2;)* to *O(n log n)*. Something like a [*pigeonhole
sort*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pigeonhole_sort) could get that down to
*O(n)*.

</aside>

The lesson is pretty obvious: if we store our objects in a data structure
organized by their locations, we can find them much more quickly. This pattern
is about applying that idea to spaces that have more than one dimension.

## The Pattern

For a set of **objects**, each has a **position in space**. Store them in a
**spatial data structure** that organizes the objects by their positions. This
data structure lets you **efficiently query for objects at or near a location**.
When an object's position changes, **update the spatial data structure** so that
it can continue to find it.

## When to Use It

This is a common pattern for storing both live, moving game objects and also the
static art and geometry of the game world. Sophisticated games often have
multiple spatial partitions for different kinds of content.

The basic requirements for this pattern are that you have a set of objects that
each have some kind of position and that you are doing enough queries to find
objects by location that your performance is suffering.

## Keep in Mind

Spatial partitions exist to knock an *O(n)* or *O(n&sup2;)* operation down to
something more manageable. The *more* objects you have, the more valuable that
becomes. Conversely, if your *n* is small enough, it may not be worth the
bother.

Since this pattern involves organizing objects by their positions, objects that
*change* position are harder to deal with. You'll have to <span
name="hash-change">reorganize</span> the data structure to keep track of an
object at a new location, and that adds code complexity *and* spends CPU cycles.
Make sure the trade-off is worth it.

<aside name="hash-change">

Imagine a hash table where the keys of the hashed objects can change
spontaneously, and you'll have a good feel for why it's tricky.

</aside>

A spatial partition also uses additional memory for its bookkeeping data
structures. Like many optimizations, it trades memory for speed. If you're
shorter on memory than you are on clock cycles, that may be a losing
proposition.

## Sample Code

The nature of patterns is that they *vary*: each implementation will be a bit
different and spatial partitions are no exception. Unlike other patterns,
though, many of these <span name="variations">variations</span> are
well-documented. Academia likes publishing papers that prove performance gains.
Since I just care about the concept behind the pattern, I'm going to show you
the simplest spatial partition: a *fixed grid*.

<aside name="variations">

See the last section of this chapter for a list of some of the most common
spatial partitions used in games.

</aside>

### A sheet of graph paper

Here's the basic idea: imagine the entire field of battle. Now superimpose a
grid of fixed-size squares onto it like a sheet of graph paper. Instead of
storing our units in a single array, we put them in the cells of this grid. Each
cell stores the list of units whose positions are within that cell's boundary.

<img src="images/spatial-partition-grid.png" />

When we handle combat, we only consider units within the same cell. Instead of
comparing each unit in the game with every other unit, we've *partitioned* the
battlefield into a bunch of smaller mini-battlefields, each with many fewer
units.

### A grid of linked units

OK, let's get coding. First, some prep work. Here's our basic unit class:

^code unit-simple

Each unit has a position (in 2D) and a pointer to the `Grid` that it lives on.
We make `Grid` a `friend` class because, as we'll see, when a unit's position
changes, it has to do an intricate dance with the grid to make sure everything
is updated correctly.

Here's a sketch of the grid:

^code grid-simple

Note that each cell is just a <span name="stl">pointer</span> to a unit. Next,
we'll extend `Unit` with `next` and `prev` pointers:

^code unit-linked

This lets us organize units into a [doubly-linked
list](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doubly_linked_list) instead of an array.

<img src="images/spatial-partition-linked-list.png" />

Each cell in the grid points to the first unit in the list of units within that
cell, and each unit has pointers to the units before it and after it in the
list. We'll see why soon.

<aside name="stl">

Throughout this book, I've avoided using any of the built-in collection types in
the C++ standard library. I want to require as little external knowledge as
possible to understand the example, and, like a magician's "nothing up my
sleeve", I want to make it clear *exactly* what's going on in the code. Details
are important, especially with performance-related patterns.

But this is my choice for *explaining* patterns. If you're *using* them in real
code, spare yourself the headache and use the fine collections built into pretty
much every programming language today. Life's too short to code linked lists
from scratch.

</aside>

### Entering the field of battle

The first thing we need to do is make sure new units are actually placed into
the grid when they are created. We'll make `Unit` handle this in its
constructor:

^code unit-ctor

This `add()` method is defined like so:

<span name="floor"></span>

^code add

<aside name="floor">

Dividing by the cell size maps world coordinates to cell space. Then, casting to
an `int` truncates the fractional part so we get the cell index.

</aside>

It's a little finicky like linked list code always is, but the basic idea is
pretty simple. We find the cell that the unit is sitting in and then add it to
the front of that list. If there is already a list of units there, we link it in
after the new unit.

### A clash of swords

Once all of the units are nestled in their cells, we can let them start hacking
at each other. With this new grid, the main method for handling combat look like
this:

^code grid-melee

It walks each cell and then calls `handleCell()` on it. As you can see, we
really have partitioned the battlefield into little isolated skirmishes. Each
cell then handles its combat like so:

^code handle-cell

Aside from the pointer shenanigans to deal with walking a linked list, note that
this is exactly <span name="nested">like</span> our original naïve method for
handling combat: it compares each pair of units to see if they're in the same
position.

The only difference is that we no longer have to compare *all* of the units in
the battle to each other, just the ones close enough to be in the same cell.
That's the heart of the optimization.

<aside name="nested">

From a simple analysis, it looks like we've actually made the performance
*worse*. We've gone from a doubly-nested loop over the units to a
*triply*-nested loop over the cells and then the units. The trick here is that
the two inner loops are now over a smaller number of units, which is enough to
cancel out the cost of the outer loop over the cells.

However, that does depend a bit on the granularity of our cells: make them too
small and that outer loop can start to matter.

</aside>

### Charging forward

We've solved our performance problem, but we've created a new problem in its
stead. Units are now stuck in their cells. If we move a unit past the boundary
of the cell that contains it, units in the cell won't see it anymore, but
neither will anyone else. Our battlefield is a little *too* partitioned.

To fix that, we'll need to do a little work each time a unit moves. If it
crosses a cell's boundary lines, we need to remove it from that cell and add it
to the new one. First, we'll give `Unit` a method for changing its position:

^code unit-move

Presumably, this gets called by the AI code for computer-controlled units and by
the user input code for the player's units. All it does is hand off control to
the grid, which then does:

^code grid-move

That's a mouthful of code, but it's pretty straightforward. The first bit checks
to see if we've crossed a cell boundary at all. If not, we can update the unit's
position and we're done.

If the unit *has* left its current cell, we remove it from that cell's linked
list and then add it back to the grid. Like with adding a new unit, that will
insert the unit in the linked list for its new cell.

This is why we're using a doubly-linked list: we can very quickly add and remove
units from lists by setting a few pointers. With lots of units moving around
each frame, that can be important.

### At arm's length

This seems pretty simple, but I have cheated in one way. In the example I've
been showing, units only interact when they have the *exact same* position.
That's true for checkers and chess, but less true for more realistic games.
Those usually have attack *distances* to take into account.

This pattern still works fine. Instead of just checking for an exact location
match, we'll do something more like:

^code handle-distance

When range gets involved, there's a corner case we need to consider: units in
different cells may still be close enough to interact.

<img src="images/spatial-partition-adjacent.png" />

Here, B is within A's attack radius even through their centerpoints are in
different cells. To handle this, we will need to compare units not only in the
same cell, but in neighboring cells too. To do this, first we'll split the inner
loop out of `handleCell()`:

^code handle-unit

Now we have a function that will take a single unit and a list of other units
and see if there are any hits. Then we'll make `handleCell()` use that:

^code handle-cell-unit

Note that we now also pass in the coordinates of the cell, not just its unit
list. Right now, this doesn't do anything differently from the previous example,
but we'll expand it slightly:

^code handle-neighbor

Those additional `handleUnit()` calls look for hits between the current unit and
units in <span name="neighbor">four</span> of the eight neighboring cells. If
any unit in those neighboring cells is close enough to the edge to be within the
unit's attack radius, it will find the hit.

<aside name="neighbor">

The cell with the unit is `U`, and the neighboring cells it looks at are `X`.

<img src="images/spatial-partition-neighbors.png" width="240" />

</aside>

We only look at *half* of the neighbors for the same reason that the inner loop
starts *after* the current unit: to avoid comparing each pair of units twice.
Consider what would happen if we did check all eight neighboring cells.

Let's say we have two units in adjacent cells close enough to hit each other,
like the previous example. If, for each unit, we looked at all eight cells
surrounding it, here's what would happen:

 1. When we are finding hits for A, we would look at its neighbor on the right
    and find B. So we'd register an attack between A and B.

 2. Then, when we are finding hits for B, we would look at its neighbor on the
    *left* and find A. So we'd register a *second* attack between A and B.

Only looking at half of the neighboring cells fixes that. *Which* half we look
at doesn't matter at all.

There's another corner case we may need to consider too. Here, we're assuming
the maximum attack distance is smaller than a cell. If we have small cells and
large attack distances, we may need to scan a bunch of neighboring cells several
rows out.

## Design Decisions

There's a relatively short list of well-defined spatial partitioning data
structures, and one option would be to go through them one at a time here.
Instead, I tried to organize this by their essential characteristics. My hope is
that once you do learn about quadtrees and BSPs and the like, this will help you
understand *how* and *why* they work and why you might choose one over the
other.

### Is the partition hierarchical or flat?

Our grid example partitioned space into a single flat set of cells. In contrast,
hierarchical spatial partitions divide the space into just a <span
name="couple">couple</span> of regions. Then, if one of these regions still
contains many objects, it's subdivided. This process continues recursively until
every region has fewer than some maximum number of objects in it.

<aside name="couple">

They usually split it in two, four, or eight -- nice round numbers to a
programmer.

</aside>

 *  **If it's a flat partition:**

     *  *It's <span name="simpler">simpler</span>.* Flat data structures are
        easier to reason about and simpler to implement.

        <aside name="simpler">

        This is a design point I mention in almost every chapter, and for good
        reason: whenever you can, take the simpler option. Much of software
        engineering is fighting against complexity.

        </aside>

     *  *Memory usage is constant.* Since adding new objects doesn't require
        creating new partitions, the memory used by the spatial partition can
        often be fixed ahead of time.

     *  *It can be faster to update when objects change their positions.* When
        an object moves, the data structure needs to be updated to find the
        object in its new location. With a hierarchical spatial partition, this
        can mean adjusting several layers of the hierarchy.

 *  **If it's hierarchical:**

     *  *It handles empty space more efficiently.* Imagine in our earlier
        example if one whole side of the battlefield was empty. We'd have a
        large number of empty cells that we'd still have to allocate memory for
        and walk each frame.

        Since hierarchical space partitions don't subdivide sparse regions, a
        large empty space will remain a single partition. Instead of lots of
        little partitions to walk, there is a single big one.

     *  *It handles densely populated areas more efficiently.* This is the other
        side of the coin: if you have a bunch of objects all clumped together, a
        non-hierarchical partition can be ineffective. You'll end up with one
        partition that has so many objects in it that you may as well not be
        partitioning at all. A hierarchical partition will adaptively subdivide
        that into smaller partitions and get you back to having only a few
        objects to consider at a time.

### Does the partitioning depend on the set of objects?

In our sample code, the grid spacing was fixed beforehand and we slotted units
into cells. Other partitioning schemes are adaptable: they pick partition
boundaries based on the actual set of objects and where they are in the world.

The goal is have a *balanced* partitioning where each region has roughly the
same number of objects in order to get the best performance. Consider in our
grid example if all of the units were clustered in one corner of the
battlefield. They'd all be in the same cell, and our code for finding attacks
would regress right back to the original *O(n&sup2;)* problem that we're trying
to solve.

 *  **If the partitioning is object-independent:**

     *  *Objects can be added incrementally.* Adding an object means finding the
        right partition and dropping it in, so you can do this one at a time
        without any performance issues.

     *  *Objects can be moved quickly.* With fixed partitions, moving a unit
        means removing it from one and adding it to another. If the partition
        boundaries themselves change based on the set of objects, then moving
        one can cause a <span name="sort">boundary</span> to move, which can in
        turn cause lots of other objects to need to be moved to different
        partitions.

        <aside name="sort">

        This is directly analogous to sorted binary search trees like red-black
        trees or AVL trees: when you add a single item, you may end up needing to
        re-sort the tree and shuffle a bunch of nodes around.

        </aside>

     *  *The partitions can be imbalanced.* Of course the downside of this
        rigidity is that you have less control over your partitions being evenly
        distributed. If objects clump together, you get worse performance there
        while wasting memory in the empty areas.

 *  **If the partitioning adapts to the set of objects:**

    Spatial partitions like BSPs and k-d trees split the world recursively so
    that each half contains about the same number of objects. To do this, you
    have to count how many objects are on each side when selecting the planes
    you partition along. Bounding volume hierarchies are another type of spatial
    partition that optimizes for the specific set of objects in the world.

     *  *You can ensure the partitions are balanced.* This gives not just good
        performance, but *consistent* performance: if each partition has the
        same number of objects, you ensure that all queries in the world will
        take about the same amount of time. When you need to maintain a stable
        frame-rate, this consistency may be more important than raw performance.

     *  *It's more efficient to partition an entire set of objects at once.*
        When the *set* of objects affects where boundaries are, it's best to
        have all of the objects up front before you partition them. This is why
        these kinds of partitions are more frequently used for art and static
        geometry that stays fixed during the game.

 *  **If the partitioning is object-independent, but *hierarchy* is
    object-dependent:**

    One spatial partition deserves special mention because it has some of the
    best characteristics of both fixed partitions and adaptable ones: <span
    name="quad">quadtrees</span>.

    <aside name="quad">

    A quadtree partitions 2D space. Its 3D analogue is the *octree*: it takes a
    *volume* and partitions it into eight *cubes*. Aside from the extra
    dimension, it works the same as its flatter sibling.

    </aside>

    A quadtree starts with the entire space as a single partition. If the number
    of objects in the space exceeds some threshold, it is sliced into four
    smaller squares. The *boundaries* of these squares are fixed: they always
    slice space right in half.

    Then, for each of the four squares, we do the same process again,
    recursively, until every square has a small number of objects in it. Since
    we only recursively subdivide squares that have a high population, this
    partitioning adapts to the set of objects, but the partitions don't *move*.

    You can see the partitioning in action reading from left to right here:

    <img src="images/spatial-partition-quadtree.png" />

     *  *Objects can be added incrementally.* Adding a new object means finding
        the right square and adding it. If that bumps that square above the
        maximum count, it gets subdivided. The other objects in that square get
        pushed down into the new smaller squares. This requires a little work,
        but it's a *fixed* amount of effort: the number of objects you have to
        move will always be less than the maximum object count. Adding a single
        object can never trigger more than one subdivision.

        Removing objects is equally simple. You remove the object from its
        square and if the parent square's total count is now below the
        threshold, you can collapse those subdivisions.

     *  *Objects can be moved quickly.* This, of course, follows from the above.
        "Moving" an object is just an add and a remove, and both of those are
        pretty quick with quadtrees.

     *  *The partitions are balanced.* Since any given square will have less
        than some fixed maximum number of objects, even when objects are
        clustered together you don't have single partitions with a huge pile of
        objects in them.

### Are objects only stored in the partition?

You can treat your spatial partition as *the* place where the objects in your
game live, or you can consider it just a secondary cache to make look-up faster
while also having another collection that holds the list of objects directly.

 *  **If it is the only place objects are stored:**

     *  *It avoids the memory overhead and complexity of two collections.* Of
        course, it's always cheaper to store something once instead of twice.
        Also, if you have two collections, you have to make sure to keep them in
        sync. Every time an object is created or destroyed, it has to be added
        or removed from both.

 *  **If there is another collection for the objects:**

     *  *Traversing all objects is faster.* If the objects in question are
        "live" and have some processing they need to do, you may find yourself
        frequently needing to visit every object regardless of its location.
        Imagine if, in our earlier example, most of the cells were empty. Having
        to walk the full grid of cells to find the non-empty ones can be a waste
        of time.

        A second collection that just stores the objects gives you a way to walk
        all them directly. You have two data structures, one optimized for each
        use case.

## See Also

 *  I've tried not to discuss specific spatial partitioning structures in detail
    here to keep the chapter high-level (and not too long!), but your next step
    from here should be to learn a few of the common structures. Despite their
    scary names, they are all surprisingly straightforward. The common ones are:

    * [Grid](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grid_(spatial_index))
    * [Quadtree](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quad_tree)
    * [BSP](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary_space_partitioning)
    * [k-d tree](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kd-tree)
    * [Bounding volume hierarchy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bounding_volume_hierarchy)

 *  Each of these spatial data structures basically extends an existing
    well-known data structure from 1D into more dimensions. Knowing their linear
    cousins will help you tell if they are a good fit for your problem:

    * A grid is a persistent [bucket sort](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bucket_sort).
    * BSPs, k-d trees, and bounding volume hierarchies are [binary search trees](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary_search_tree).
    * Quadtrees and octrees are [tries](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trie).
